This is the palace of thefearful king,
And this the regal seat:possess it, York;
For this is thine and notKing Henry's heirs'
Assist me, then, sweetWarwick, and I will;
We'll all assist you; hethat flies shall die.
Thanks, gentle Norfolk:
And when the king comes,offer him no violence,
Unless he seek to thrustyou out perforce.
Then leave me not, mylords; be resolute;
I mean to take possessionof my right.
Neither the king, nor hethat loves him best,
The proudest he that holdsup Lancaster,
Dares stir a wing, ifWarwick shake his bells.
I'll plant Plantagenet,root him up who dares:
Resolve thee, Richard;claim the English crown.
(celebrating cheers)
(horns sound)
My lords, look where thesturdy rebel sits,
Even in the chair ofstate: belike he means,
Back'd by the power ofWarwick, that false peer,
To aspire unto the crownand reign as king.
Earl of Northumberland, heslew thy father.
And thine, Lord Clifford; andyou both have vow'd revenge
On him, his sons, hisfavourites and his friends.
If I be not, heavens berevenged on me!
The hope thereof makesClifford mourn in steel.
What, shall we suffer this?let's pluck him down:
My heart for anger burns;I cannot brook it.
Be patient, gentle Earl ofWestmoreland.
Patience is for poltroons,such as he:
He durst not sit there,had your father lived.
My gracious lord, here inthe parliament
Let us assail the familyof York.
Well hast thou spoken,cousin: be it so.
Ah, know you not the cityfavours them,
And they have troops ofsoldiers at their beck?
But when the duke is slain,they'll quickly fly.
Far be the thought of thisfrom Henry's heart,
To make a shambles of theparliament-house!
Cousin of Exeter, frowns,words and threats
Shall be the war thatHenry means to use.
Thou factious Duke ofYork, descend my throne,
and kneel for grace andmercy at my feet;
I am thy sovereign.
I am thine.
For shame, come down: hemade thee Duke of York.
'Twas my inheritance, asthe earldom was.
Thy father was a traitorto the crown.
Exeter, thou art a traitorto the crown
In following this usurpingHenry.
Whom should he follow buthis natural king?
True, Clifford; and that'sRichard Duke of York.
And shall I stand, andthou sit in my throne?
It must and shall be so:content thyself.
Be Duke of Lancaster; lethim be king.
He is both king and Dukeof Lancaster;
And that the Lord ofWestmoreland shall maintain.
And Warwick shall disprove it.
You forget that we are thosewhich chased you from the field
And slew your fathers, andwith colours spread
March'd through the cityto the palace gates.
Yes, Warwick, I do rememberit to my grief;
And, by his soul, thou andthy house shall rue it.
Plantagenet, of thee andthese thy sons,
Thy kinsman and thy friends,I'll have more lives
Than drops of blood werein my father's veins.
Urge it no more; lestthat, instead of words,
I send thee, Warwick, sucha messenger
As shall revenge his deathbefore I stir.
Poor Clifford! how I scornhis worthless threats!
Will you we show our titleto the crown?
If not, our swords shallplead it in the field.
What title hast thou,traitor, to the crown?
Thy father was, as thouart, Duke of York;
Thy grandfather, RogerMortimer, Earl of March:
I am the son of Henry theFifth,
Who made the Dauphin andthe French to stoop
And seized upon theirtowns and provinces.
Talk not of France, siththou hast lost it all.
The lord protector lostit, and not I:
When I was crown'd I wasbut nine months old.
You are old enough now, andyet, methinks, you lose.
Father, tear the crownfrom the usurper's head.
Sweet father, do so; setit on your head.
Good father, as thoulovest and honourest arms,
Let's fight it out and notstand cavilling thus.
Sound drums and trumpets,and the king will fly.
Sons, peace!
Peace, thou! and give KingHenry leave to speak.
Plantagenet shall speakfirst: hear him, lords;
And be you silent andattentive too,
For he that interrupts himshall not live.
Plantagenet, why seeks thou todipose thee?
Are we not bothplantagenets by birth
and from two brotherslinearly decent?
Suppose by right and equity,thou be king.
Think'st thou that I willleave my kingly throne,
Wherein my grandsire andmy father sat?
No: first shall warunpeople this my realm;
Ay, and their colours,often borne in France,
And now in England to ourheart's great sorrow,
Shall be my winding-sheet.Why faint you, lords?
My title's good, andbetter far than his.
Prove it, Henry, and thoushalt be king.
Henry the Fourth byconquest got the crown.
'Twas by rebellion againsthis king.
I know not what to say; mytitle's weak.--
Tell me, may not a kingadopt an heir?
What then?
An if he may, then am Ilawful king;
For Richard, in the viewof many lords,
Resign'd the crown toHenry the Fourth,
Whose heir my father was,and I am his.
He rose against him, beinghis sovereign,
And made him to resign hiscrown perforce.
Suppose, my lords, he didit unconstrain'd,
Think you 'twereprejudicial to his crown?
No; for he could not soresign his crown
But that the next heirshould succeed and reign.
Art thou against us, Dukeof Exeter?
His is the right, andtherefore pardon me.
Why whisper you, my lords,and answer not?
My conscience tells me heis lawful king.
All will revolt from me,and turn to him.
King Henry, be thy titleright or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows tofight in thy defence:
May that ground gape andswallow me alive,
Where I shall kneel to himthat slew my father!
O Clifford, how thy wordsrevive my heart!
Henry of Lancaster, resignthy crown.
Do right unto thisprincely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the housewith armed men,
And over the chair ofstate, where now he sits,
Write up his title withusurping blood.
(drums sound)
My Lord of Warwick, hearme but one word:
Let me for this mylife-time reign as king.
Confirm the crown to meand to mine heirs,
And thou shalt reign inquiet while thou livest.
Convey the soldiers hence,and then I will.
Captain: Conduct them into thefields.
Away!
I am content: RichardPlantagenet,
Enjoy the kingdom after mydecease.
What wrong is this untothe prince your son!
What good is this toEngland and himself!
Base, fearful anddespairing Henry!
How hast thou injured boththyself and us!
I cannot stay to hearthese articles.
Nor I.
Come, cousin, let us tellthe queen these news.
Farewell, faint-heartedand degenerate king,
In whose cold blood nospark of honour bides.
Be thou a prey unto thehouse of York,
And die in bands for thisunmanly deed!
In dreadful war mayst thoube overcome,
Or live in peace abandon'dand despised!
Turn this way, Henry, andregard them not.
They seek revenge andtherefore will not yield.
Ah, Exeter!
Why should you sigh, mylord?
Not for myself, LordWarwick, but my son,
Whom I unnaturally shalldisinherit.
But be it as it may:
I here entail The crown to theeand to thine heirs for ever;
Conditionally, that herethou take thine oath
To cease this civil war,and, whilst I live,
To honour me as thy kingand sovereign,
And neither by treason norhostility
To seek to put me down andreign thyself.
This oath I willingly takeand will perform.
Long live the King!
(crowd chants) Long live theKing!
And long live thou andthese thy forward sons!
Now York and Lancaster arereconciled.
Accursed be he that seeksto make them foes!
(horn sounds)
Farewell, my graciouslord; I'll take my leave.
But I'll to Wakefield to mycastle.
And I'll keep London withmy soldiers.
And I to Norfolk with myfollowers.
And I, with grief andsorrow, to the court.
Here comes the queen, whoselooks bewray her anger:
I'll steal away.
Exeter, so will I.
Nay, go not from me; Iwill follow thee.
Be patient, gentle queen,and I will stay.
Who can be patient in suchextremes?
Ah, wretched man! would Ihad died a maid
And never seen thee, neverborne thee son,
Seeing thou hast proved sounnatural a father
Hath he deserved to losehis birthright thus?
Father, you cannotdisinherit me:
If you be king, why shouldnot I succeed?
Pardon me, Margaret;pardon me, sweet son:
The Earl of Warwick andthe duke enforced me.
Enforced thee! art thouking, and wilt be forced?
I shame to hear thee speak.Ah, timorous wretch!
Thou hast undone thyself,thy son and me;
And given unto the houseof York such head
As thou shalt reign but bytheir sufferance.
To entail him and hisheirs unto the crown,
What is it, but to makethy sepulchre
And creep into it farbefore thy time?
Warwick is chancellor. Salisburylord of Calais;
And the duke is made protectorof the realm;
And yet shalt thou besafe? such safety finds
The trembling lambenvironed with wolves.
Had I been there, which ama silly woman,
The soldiers should havetoss'd me on their pikes
Before I would havegranted to that act.
But thou preferr'st thylife before thine honour:
And seeing thou dost, Ihere divorce myself
Both from thy table,Henry, and thy bed,
Until that act ofparliament be repeal'd
Whereby my son isdisinherited.
The northern lords thathave forsworn thy colours
Will follow mine, if oncethey see them spread;
And spread they shall be,to thy foul disgrace
And utter ruin of thehouse of York.
Thus do I leave thee.Come, son, let's away;
Our army is ready; come,we'll after them.
Stay, gentle Margaret, andhear me speak.
Thou hast spoke too muchalready: get thee gone.
Gentle son Edward, thouwilt stay with me?
Ay, to be murder'd by hisenemies.
When I return with victoryfrom the field
I'll see your grace: tillthen I'll follow her.
Come, son, away; we maynot linger thus.
Poor queen! how love to meand to her son
Hath made her break outinto terms of rage!
Revenged may she be onthat hateful duke,
Whose haughty spirit,winged with desire,
Will cost my crown, andlike an empty eagle
Tire on the flesh of meand of my son!
The loss of those threelords torments my heart:
I'll write unto them andentreat them fair.
Come, cousin you shall bethe messenger.
And I, I hope, shallreconcile them all.
Brother, though I beyoungest, give me leave.
No, I can better play theorator.
But I have reasons strongand forcible.
Why, how now, sons! At astrife?
What is your quarrel? howbegan it first?
No quarrel, but a slightcontention.
About what?
About that which concernsyour grace and us;
The crown of England,father, which is yours.
Mine boy? not till KingHenry be dead.
Your right depends not onhis life or death.
Now you are heir,therefore enjoy it now:
By giving the house ofLancaster leave to breathe,
It will outrun you,father, in the end.
I took an oath that heshould quietly reign.
But for a kingdom any oathmay be broken:
I would break a thousandoaths to reign one year.
No; God forbid your graceshould be forsworn.
I shall be, if I claim byopen war.
I'll prove the contrary,if you'll hear me speak.
Thou canst not, son; it isimpossible.
An oath is of no moment,being not took
Before a true and lawfulmagistrate,
That hath authority overhim that swears:
Henry had none, but didusurp the place;
Then, seeing 'twas he thatmade you to depose,
Your oath, my lord, isvain and frivolous.
Therefore, to arms! And,father, do but think
How sweet a thing it is towear a crown;
Within whose circuit isElysium
And all that poets feignof bliss and joy.
Why do we linger thus? Icannot rest
Until the white rose thatI wear be dyed
Even in the lukewarm bloodof Henry's heart.
Richard, enough; I will beking, or die.
Cousin, thou shalt toLondon presently,
And whet on Warwick tothis enterprise.
Richard and George, you shalt toNorfolk straight,
And tell him privily ofour intent.
You Edward, shall to EdmundBrooke, Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentishmenwill willingly rise:
In them I trust; for theyare soldiers,
Witty, courteous, liberal,full of spirit.
While you are thus employ'd,what resteth more,
But that I seek occasionhow to rise,
And yet the king not privyto my drift,
Nor any of the house ofLancaster?
(horn sounds)
But, stay: what news? Whycomest thou in such post?
The queen with all thenorthern earls and lords
Intend here to besiege youin your castle:
She is hard by with twentythousand men;
And therefore fortify yourhold, my lord.
Ay, with my sword.
What! think'st thouthat we fear them?
Edward and Richard, youshall stay with me;(bell rings)
Haste you to London cousinMontague:
Let noble Warwick, Cobham,and the rest,
Whom we have leftprotectors of the king,
With powerful policystrengthen themselves,
And trust not simple Henrynor his oaths.
Cousin, I go; I'll winthem, fear it not:
Sir John and Sir HughMortimer, mine uncles,
You are come to Sandal ina happy hour;
The army of the queen meanto besiege us.
She shall not need; we'llmeet her in the field.
What, with five thousandmen?
Ay, with five hundred,father, for a need:
A woman's general; whatshould we fear?
I hear their drums: let'sset our men in order,
And issue forth and bidthem battle straight.
Five men to twenty! thoughthe odds be great,
I doubt not, uncle, of ourvictory.
Many a battle have I wonin France,
When as the enemy hathbeen ten to one:
Why should I not now havethe like success?
(bells ring, drums beat)
Ah, whither shall I fly to'scape their hands?
Ah, tutor, look wherebloody Clifford comes!
Chaplain, away! thypriesthood saves thy life.
As for the brat of thisaccursed duke,
Whose father slew myfather, he shall die.
And I, my lord, will bearhim company.
Soldiers, away with him!
Ah, Clifford, murder notthis innocent child,
Lest thou be hated both ofGod and man!
How now! is he dead already?
Or is it fear that makes himclose his eyes? I'll open them.
So looks the pent-up liono'er the wretch
That trembles under hisdevouring paws;
Sweet Clifford, hear mespeak before I die.
I am too mean a subjectfor thy wrath:
Be thou revenged on men,and let me live.
In vain thouspeak'st, poor boy;
my father's blood hathstopp'd the passage
where thy words should enter.
Then let my father's bloodopen it again:
He is a man, and,Clifford, cope with him.
Had thy brethren here,their lives and thine
Were not revengesufficient for me;
No, if I digg'd up thyforefathers' graves
And hung their rottencoffins up in chains,
It could not slake mineire, nor ease my heart.
The sight of any of thehouse of York
Is as a fury to torment mysoul;
And till I root out theiraccursed line
And leave not one alive, Ilive in hell.
Therefore--
O, let me pray before Itake my death!
To thee I pray; sweetClifford, pity me!
Such pity as my rapier'spoint affords.
I never did thee harm: whywilt thou slay me?
Thy father hath.
But 'twas ere I was born.
Thou hast one son; for hissake pity me,
Thy father slew my father;therefore, die.
Di faciant laudis summasit ista tuae!
Plantagenet! I come,Plantagenet!
And this thy son's bloodcleaving to my blade
Shall rust upon my weapon,till thy blood,
Congeal'd with this, domake me wipe off both.
The army of the queen hathgot the field:
My uncles both are slainin rescuing me;
And all my followers tothe eager foe
Turn back and fly, likeships before the wind
Or lambs pursued byhunger-starved wolves.
My sons, God knows whathath bechanced them:
But this I know, they havedemean'd themselves
Like men born to renown bylife or death.
Three times did Richardmake a lane to me.
And thrice cried 'Courage,father! fight it out!'
And full as oft cameEdward to my side,
With purple falchion,painted to the hilt
In blood of those that hadencounter'd him:
And when the hardiestwarriors did retire,
and George cried 'Charge! andgive no foot of ground!'
Edward.  'A crown, orelse a glorious tomb!
A sceptre, or an earthlysepulchre!'
With this, we chargedagain: but, out, alas!
We bodged again; as I haveseen a swan
With bootless labour swimagainst the tide
And spend her strengthwith over-matching waves.
(trumpets sound)
Ah, hark! the fatalfollowers do pursue;
And I am faint and cannotfly their fury:
And were I strong, I wouldnot shun their fury:
The sands are number'dthat make up my life;
Here must I stay, and heremy life must end.
Come, bloody Clifford,rough Northumberland,
I dare your quenchlessfury to more rage:
I am your butt, and Iabide your shot.
Yield to our mercy, proudPlantagenet.
Ay, to such mercy as hisruthless arm,
With downright payment,show'd unto my father.
My ashes, like the phoenix,may bring forth
A bird that will revengeupon you all:
And in that hope I throwmine eyes to heaven,
Scorning whate'er you canafflict me with.
Why come you not? what!multitudes, and fear?
So cowards fight when theycan fly no further;
So doves do peck thefalcon's piercing talons;
So desperate thieves, allhopeless of their lives,
Breathe out invectives'gainst the officers.
O Clifford, but bethinkthee once again,
And in thy thoughto'er-run my former time;
And, if though canst forblushing, view this face,
And bite thy tongue, thatslanders him with cowardice
Whose frown hath made theefaint and fly ere this!
I will not bandy with theeword for word,
But buckle with theeblows, twice two for one.
Hold, valiant Clifford!for a thousand causes
I would prolong awhile thetraitor's life.
Wrath makes him deaf: speakthou, Northumberland.
Hold, Clifford! do nothonour him so much
To prick thy finger,though to wound his heart:
What valour were it, whena cur doth grin,
For one to thrust his handbetween his teeth,
When he might spurn himwith his foot away?
It is war's prize to takeall vantages;
And ten to one is noimpeach of valour.
Ay, ay, so strives thewoodcock with the gin.
So doth the cony strugglein the net.
So triumph thieves upontheir conquer'd booty;
So true men yield, withrobbers so o'ermatch'd.
What would your grace havedone unto him now?
Brave warriors, Cliffordand Northumberland,
Come, make him stand uponthis molehill here,
That raught at mountainswith outstretched arms,
Yet parted but the shadowwith his hand.
(laughing)
What! was it you thatwould be England's king?
Was't you that revell'd inour parliament,
And made a preachment ofyour high descent?
Where are your mess ofsons to back you now?
The wanton Edward, and thelusty George?
And where's that valiantcrook-back prodigy,
Dicky your boy, that withhis grumbling voice
Was wont to cheer his dadin mutinies?
Or, with the rest, whereis your darling Rutland?
Look, York: I stain'd thisnapkin with the blood
That valiant Clifford,with his rapier's point,
Made issue from thebosom of the boy;
And if thine eyes canwater for his death,
I give thee this to drythy cheeks withal.
Alas poor York! but that Ihate thee deadly,
I should lament thymiserable state.
I prithee, grieve, to makeme merry, York.
What, hath thy fiery heartso parch'd thine entrails
That not a tear can fallfor Rutland's death?
Why art thou patient, man?thou shouldst be mad;
And I, to make thee mad,do mock thee thus.
Stamp, rave, and fret,that I may sing and dance.
Thou wouldst be fee'd, Isee, to make me sport:
York cannot speak, unlesshe wears a crown.
A crown for York! and,lords, bow low to him:
Hold you his hands, whilstI do set it on.
Ay, marry, sir, now lookshe like a king!
Ay, this is he that tookKing Henry's chair,
And this is he was hisadopted heir.
But how is it that greatPlantagenet
Is crown'd so soon, andbroke his solemn oath?
As I bethink me, youshould not be king
Till our King Henry hadshook hands with death.
And will you pale yourhead in Henry's glory,
And rob his temples of thediadem,
Now in his life, againstyour holy oath?
O, 'tis a fault too toounpardonable!
Off with the crown, andwith the crown his head;
And, whilst we breathe,take time to do him dead.
That is my office, for myfather's sake.
Nay, stay; lets hear theorisons he makes.
She-wolf of France, butworse than wolves of France,
Whose tongue more poisonsthan the adder's tooth!
How ill-beseeming is it inthy sex
To triumph, like anAmazonian trull,
Upon their woes whomfortune captivates!
But that thy face is,vizard-like, unchanging,
Made impudent with use ofevil deeds,
I would assay, proudqueen, to make thee blush.
To tell thee whence thoucamest, of whom derived,
Were shame enough to shamethee, wert thou not shameless.
Thy father bears the typeof King of Naples,
Of both the Sicils andJerusalem,
Yet not so wealthy as anEnglish yeoman.
Hath that poor monarchtaught thee to insult?
'Tis beauty that doth oftmake women proud;
But, God he knows, thyshare thereof is small:
'Tis virtue that doth makethem most admired;
The contrary doth makethee wonder'd at:
'Tis government that makesthem seem divine;
The want thereof makesthee abominable:
O tiger's heart wrapt in awoman's hide!
How couldst thou drain thelife-blood of the child,
To bid the father wipe hiseyes withal,
And yet be seen to bear awoman's face?
Women are soft, mild,pitiful and flexible;
Thou stern, obdurate,flinty, rough, remorseless.
Bids't thou me rage? why,now thou hast thy wish:
Wouldst have me weep? why,now thou hast thy will:
For raging wind blows upincessant showers,
And when the rage allays,the rain begins.
These tears are my sweetRutland's obsequies:
And every drop criesvengeance for his death,
'Gainst thee, fell Clifford,and thee, false Frenchwoman.
Beshrew me, but hispassion moves me so
That hardly can I chequemy eyes from tears.
That face of his thehungry cannibals
Would not have touch'd, wouldnot have stain'd with blood:
But you are more inhuman,more inexorable,
O, ten times more, thantigers of Hyrcania.
See, ruthless queen, ahapless father's tears:
This cloth thou dip'dst inblood of my sweet boy,
And I with tears do washthe blood away.
Keep thou the napkin, andgo boast of this:
And if thou tell'st theheavy story right,
Upon my soul, the hearerswill shed tears;
Yea even my foes will shedfast-falling tears,
And say 'Alas, it was apiteous deed!'
There, take the crown, and,with the crown, my curse;
And in thy need suchcomfort come to thee
As now I reap at thy toocruel hand!
Hard-hearted Clifford,take me from the world:
My soul to heaven, myblood upon your heads!
Had he been slaughter-manto all my kin,
I should not for my lifebut weep with him.
To see how inly sorrowgripes his soul.
What, weeping-ripe, myLord Northumberland?
Think but upon the wronghe did us all,
And that will quickly drythy melting tears.
Here's for my oath, here'sfor my father's death.
And here's to right ourgentle-hearted king.
Open Thy gate of mercy,gracious God!
My soul flies through thesewounds to seek out Thee.
Off with his head, and setit on York gates;
That York may overlook thetown of York.
I wonder how our princelyfather 'scaped,
Or whether he be 'scapedaway or no
From Clifford's andNorthumberland's pursuit:
Had he been ta'en, weshould have heard the news;
Had he been slain, weshould have heard the news;
Or had he 'scaped, methinkswe should have heard
The happy tidings of hisgood escape.
How fares my brother? whyis he so sad?
I cannot joy, until I beresolved
Where our right valiantfather is become.
I saw him in the battlerange about;
And watch'd him how hesingled Clifford forth.
Methought he bore him inthe thickest troop
As doth a lion in a herdof neat;
Or as a bear, encompass'dround with dogs,
Who having pinch'd a fewand made them cry,
The rest stand all aloof,and bark at him.
So fared our father withhis enemies;
So fled his enemies mywarlike father:
Methinks, 'tis prizeenough to be his son.
See how the morning opesher golden gates,
And takes her farewell ofthe glorious sun!
How well resembles it theprime of youth,
Trimm'd like a younkerprancing to his love!
Dazzle mine eyes, or do Isee three suns?
Three glorious suns, eachone a perfect sun;
Not separated with theracking clouds,
But sever'd in a paleclear-shining sky.
See, see! they join,embrace, and seem to kiss,
As if they vow'd someleague inviolable:
Now are they but one lamp,one light, one sun.
In this the heaven figuressome event.
'Tis wondrous strange, thelike yet never heard of.
I think it cites us,brother, to the field,
That we, the sons of bravePlantagenet,
Each one already blazingby our meeds,
Should notwithstandingjoin our lights together
And over-shine the earthas this the world.
Whate'er it bodes,henceforward will I bear
Upon my target threefair-shining suns.
Nay, bear three daughters:by your leave I speak it,
You love the breederbetter than the male.
But what art thou, whoseheavy looks foretell
Some dreadful storyhanging on thy tongue?
Ah, one that was a wofullooker-on
When as the noble Duke ofYork was slain,
Your princely father andmy loving lord!
O, speak no more, for Ihave heard too much.
Say how he died, for Iwill hear it all.
Environed he was with manyfoes,
And stood against them, asthe hope of Troy
Against the Greeks thatwould have enter'd Troy.
But Hercules himself mustyield to odds;
And many strokes, thoughwith a little axe,
Hew down and fell thehardest-timber'd oak.
By many hands your fatherwas subdued;
But only slaughter'd bythe ireful arm
Of unrelenting Cliffordand the queen,
Who crown'd the graciousduke in high despite,
Laugh'd in his face; andwhen with grief he wept,
The ruthless queen gavehim to dry his cheeks
A napkin steeped in theharmless blood
Of sweet young Rutland, byrough Clifford slain:
And after many scorns,many foul taunts,
They took his head, and onthe gates of York
They set the same; andthere it doth remain,
The saddest spectacle thate'er I view'd.
Sweet Duke of York, ourprop to lean upon,
Now thou art gone, we haveno staff, no stay.
O Clifford, savageClifford! thou hast slain
The flower of Europe forhis chivalry;
And treacherously hastthou vanquish'd him,
For hand to hand he wouldhave vanquish'd thee.
Now my soul's palace isbecome a prison:
Ah, would she break fromhence, that this my body
Might in the ground beclosed up in rest!
For never henceforth shallI joy again,
Never, O never shall I seemore joy!
I cannot weep; for all mybody's moisture
Scarce serves to quench myfurnace-burning heart:
Nor can my tongue unloadmy heart's great burthen;
For selfsame wind that Ishould speak withal
Is kindling coals thatfires all my breast,
And burns me up with flamesthat tears would quench.
To weep is to make lessthe depth of grief:
Tears then for babes;blows and revenge for me
Richard, I bear thy name;I'll venge thy death,
Or die renowned byattempting it.
His name that valiant dukehath left with thee;
His dukedom and his chairwith me is left.
Nay, if thou be thatprincely eagle's bird,
Show thy descent by gazing'gainst the sun:
For chair and dukedom,throne and kingdom say;
Either that is thine, or elsethou wert not his.
(drums sound)
How now, fair lords! Whatfare? what news abroad?
Great Lord of Warwick, ifwe should recount
Our baleful news, and ateach word's deliverance
Stab poniards in our fleshtill all were told,
The words would add moreanguish than the wounds.
O valiant lord, the Dukeof York is slain!
O Warwick, Warwick! thatPlantagenet,
Which held three dearly ashis soul's redemption,
Is by the stern LordClifford done to death.
Ten days ago I drown'dthese news in tears;
And now, to add moremeasure to your woes,
I come to tell you thingssith then befall'n.
After the bloody fray atWakefield fought,
Where your brave fatherbreathed his latest gasp,
Tidings, as swiftly as theposts could run,
Were brought me of yourloss and his depart.
I, then in London keeperof the king,
Muster'd my soldiers,gather'd flocks of friends,
And very well appointed,as I thought,
March'd toward Saint Alban'sto intercept the queen,
Bearing the king in mybehalf along;
For by my scouts I wasadvertised
That she was coming with afull intent
To dash our late decree inparliament
Touching King Henry's oathand your succession.
Short tale to make, we atSaint Alban's met
Our battles join'd, andboth sides fiercely fought:
But whether 'twas thecoldness of the king,
Who look'd full gently onhis warlike queen,
That robb'd my soldiers oftheir heated spleen;
Or whether 'twas report ofher success;
Or more than common fearof Clifford's rigour,
Who thunders to hiscaptives blood and death,
I cannot judge: but toconclude with truth,
Their weapons like tolightning came and went;
Our soldiers', like thenight-owl's lazy flight,
Or like an idle thresherwith a flail,
Fell gently down, as ifthey struck their friends.
I cheer'd them up withjustice of our cause,
With promise of high payand great rewards:
But all in vain; they hadno heart to fight,
And we in them no hope towin the day;
So that we fled; the kingunto the queen;
My Lord the Duke ofNorfolk and myself,
In haste, post-haste, arecome to join with you:
For in the marches here weheard you were,
Making another head tofight again.
Where is the Duke ofNorfolk, gentle Warwick?
Some six miles off theduke is with the soldiers;
'Twas odds, belike, whenvaliant Warwick fled:
Oft have I heard hispraises in pursuit,
But ne'er till now hisscandal of retire.
Nor now my scandal,Richard, dost thou hear;
For thou shalt know thisstrong right hand of mine
Can pluck the diadem fromfaint Henry's head,
And wring the awfulsceptre from his fist,
Were he as famous and asbold in war
As he is famed for mildness,peace, and prayer.
I know it well, LordWarwick; blame me not:
'Tis love I bear thyglories makes me speak.
But in this troublous timewhat's to be done?
Shall we go throw away ourcoats of steel,
And wrap our bodies inblack mourning gowns,
Numbering our Ave-Marieswith our beads?
Or shall we on the helmetsof our foes
Tell our devotion withrevengeful arms?
If for the last, say ay,and to it, lords.
Why, therefore Warwickcame to seek you out;
And therefore comes mybrother Montague.
Attend me, lords. Theproud insulting queen,
With Clifford and thehaught Northumberland,
And of their feather manymore proud birds,
Have wrought theeasy-melting king like wax.
He swore consent to yoursuccession,
His oath enrolled in theparliament;
And now to London all thecrew are gone,
To frustrate both his oathand what beside
May make against the houseof Lancaster.
Their power, I think, isthirty thousand strong:
Now, if the help ofNorfolk and myself,
With all the friends thatthou, brave Earl of March,
Amongst the lovingWelshmen canst procure,
Will but amount to fiveand twenty thousand,
Why, Via! to London willwe march amain,
And once again cry 'Chargeupon our foes!'
But never once again turnback and fly.
Ay, now methinks I heargreat Warwick speak:
Ne'er may he live to see asunshine day,
That cries 'Retire,' ifWarwick bid him stay.
Lord Warwick, on thyshoulder will I lean;
And when thou fail'st--asGod forbid the hour!--
Must Edward fall, whichperil heaven forfend!
No longer Earl of March,but Duke of York:
The next degree isEngland's royal throne;
For King of England shaltthou be proclaim'd
In every borough as wepass along;
And he that throws not uphis cap for joy
Shall for the fault makeforfeit of his head.
King Edward, George, braveRichard, Montague,
Stay we no longer,dreaming of renown,
But sound the trumpets,and about our task.
Then, Clifford, were thyheart as hard as steel,
As thou hast shown itflinty by thy deeds,
I come to pierce it, or togive thee mine.
Then strike up drums: Godand Saint George for us!
(drums sound) (groupscreams) God and St. George!
How now! what news?
The Duke of Norfolk sendsyou word by me,
The queen is coming with apuissant host;
And craves your companyfor speedy counsel.
Why then it sorts, bravewarriors, let's away.
(drums pounding, trumpetblaring)
Welcome, my lord, to thisbrave town of York.
Yonder's the head of thatarch-enemy
That sought to beencompass'd with your crown:
Doth not the object cheeryour heart, my lord?
Ay, as the rocks cheer themthat fear their wreck:
To see this sight, it irksmy very soul.
Withhold revenge, dearGod! 'tis not my fault,
Nor wittingly have Iinfringed my vow.
My gracious liege, thistoo much lenity
And harmful pity must belaid aside.
To whom do lions casttheir gentle looks?
Not to the beast thatwould usurp their den.
Whose hand is that theforest bear doth lick?
Not his that spoils heryoung before her face.
Who 'scapes the lurkingserpent's mortal sting?
Not he that sets his footupon her back.
The smallest worm willturn being trodden on,
And doves will peck insafeguard of their brood.
Ambitious York doth levelat thy crown,
Thou smiling while he knithis angry brows:
He, but a duke, would havehis son a king,
And raise his issue, likea loving sire;
Thou, being a king, blestwith a goodly son,
Didst yield consent todisinherit him,
Which argued thee a mostunloving father.
Unreasonable creaturesfeed their young;
And though man's face befearful to their eyes,
Yet, in protection oftheir tender ones,
Who hath not seen them,even with those wings
Which sometime they haveused with fearful flight,
Make war with him thatclimb'd unto their nest,
Offer their own lives intheir young's defence?
For shame, my liege, makethem your precedent!
Were it not pity thatthis goodly boy
Should lose his birthrightby his father's fault,
And long hereafter sayunto his child,
'What my great-grandfatherand his grandsire got
My careless father fondlygave away'?
Ah, what a shame werethis! Look on the boy;
And let his manly face,which promiseth
Successful fortune, steelthy melting heart
To hold thine own andleave thine own with him.
Full well hath Cliffordplay'd the orator,
Inferring arguments ofmighty force.
But, Clifford, tell me,didst thou never hear
That things ill-got hadever bad success?
I'll leave my son myvirtuous deeds behind;
And would my father hadleft me no more!
For all the rest is heldat such a rate
As brings a thousand-foldmore care to keep
Than in possession and jotof pleasure.
Ah, cousin York! would thybest friends did know
How it doth grieve me thatthy head stands here!
My lord, cheer up yourspirits: your foes are nigh,
And this soft courage makesyour followers faint.
You promised knighthood toour forward son:
Unsheathe your sword, anddub him presently.
Edward, kneel down.
Edward Plantagenet, arisea knight;
And learn this lesson,draw thy sword in right.
My gracious father, byyour kingly leave,
I'll draw it as apparentto the crown,
And in that quarrel use itto the death.
Why, that is spoken like atoward prince.
Royal commanders, be inreadiness:
For with a band of thirtythousand men comes Warwick,
backing of the Duke of York;
And in the towns, as theydo march along,
Proclaims him king, andmany fly to him:
Darraign your battle, forthey are at hand.
I would your highnesswould depart the field:
The queen hath best successwhen you are absent.
Ay, good my lord, andleave us to our fortune.
Why, that's my fortunetoo; therefore I'll stay.
Be it with resolution thento fight.
My royal father, cheerthese noble lords
And hearten those thatfight in your defence:
Unsheathe your sword, goodfather; cry 'Saint George!'
Now, perjured Henry! wiltthou kneel for grace,
And set thy diadem upon myhead;
Or bide the mortal fortuneof the field?
Go, rate thy minions,proud insulting boy!
Becomes it thee to be thusbold in terms
Before thy sovereign andthy lawful king?
I am his king, and heshould bow his knee;
I was adopted heir by hisconsent:
Since when, his oath isbroke; for, as I hear,
You, that are king, thoughhe do wear the crown,
Have caused him, by newact of parliament,
To blot out me, and puthis own son in.
And reason too:
Who should succeed thefather but the son?
Are you there, butcher? O,I cannot speak!
Ay, crook-back, here Istand to answer thee,
Or any he the proudest ofthy sort.
'Twas you that kill'dyoung Rutland, was it not?
Ay, and old York, and yetnot satisfied.
For God's sake, lords,give signal to the fight.
What say'st thou, Henry,wilt thou yield the crown?
Why, how now, long-tonguedWarwick! dare you speak?
When you and I met atSaint Alban's last,
Your legs did betterservice than your hands.
Then 'twas my turn to flee,and now 'tis thine.
You said so much before,and yet you fled.
'Twas not your valour,Clifford, drove me thence.
No, nor your manhood thatdurst make you stay.
Break off the parley; forscarce I can refrain
The execution of mybig-swoln heart
Upon that Clifford, thatcruel child-killer.
I slew thy father, call'stthou him a child?
Ay, like a dastard and atreacherous coward,
As thou didst kill ourtender brother Rutland;
But ere sunset I'll makethee curse the deed.
Have done with words, mylords, and hear me speak.
Defy them then, or elsehold close thy lips.
I prithee, give no limitsto my tongue:
I am a king, andprivileged to speak.
My liege, the wound thatbred this meeting here
Cannot be cured by words;therefore be still.
Then, executioner,unsheathe thy sword:
By him that made us all, Iam resolved
that Clifford's manhoodlies upon his tongue.
Say, Henry, shall I havemy right, or no?
A thousand men have broketheir fasts to-day,
That ne'er shall dine unlessthou yield the crown.
If thou deny, their bloodupon thy head;
For York in justice putshis armour on.
If that be right whichWarwick says is right,
There is no wrong, butevery thing is right.
Whoever got thee, therethy mother stands;
For, well I wot, thou hastthy mother's tongue.
But thou art neither likethy sire nor dam;
But like a foul mis-shapenstigmatic,
Mark'd by the destinies tobe avoided,
As venom toads, orlizards' dreadful stings.
Iron of Naples hid withEnglish gilt,
Whose father bears thetitle of a king,--
As if a channel should becall'd the sea,--
Shamest thou not, knowingwhence thou art extraught,
To let thy tongue detectthy base-born heart?
A wisp of straw were wortha thousand crowns,
To make this shamelesscallet know herself.
Helen of Greece was fairerfar than thou,
Although thy husband maybe Menelaus;
And ne'er was Agamemnon'sbrother wrong'd
By that false woman, asthis king by thee.
His father revell'd in theheart of France,
And tamed the king, andmade the dauphin stoop;
And had he match'daccording to his state,
He might have kept thatglory to this day;
But when he took a beggarto his bed,
And graced thy poor sirewith his bridal-day,
Even then that sunshinebrew'd a shower for him,
That wash'd his father'sfortunes forth of France,
And heap'd sedition on hiscrown at home.
For what hath broach'dthis tumult but thy pride?
Hadst thou been meek, ourtitle still had slept;
And we, in pity of thegentle king,
Had slipp'd our claimuntil another age.
But when we saw oursunshine made thy spring,
And that thy summer bredus no increase,
We set the axe to thyusurping root;
And though the edge hathsomething hit ourselves,
Yet, know thou, since wehave begun to strike,
We'll never leave till wehave hewn thee down,
Or bathed thy growing withour heated bloods.
And, in this resolution, Idefy thee;
Not willing any longerconference,
Since thou deniest thegentle king to speak.
Sound trumpets! let ourbloody colours wave!
And either victory, orelse a grave.
Stay, Edward.
No, wrangling woman, we'llno longer stay:
These words will cost tenthousand lives this day.
(drums sound)
(canons boom)
Forspent with toil, asrunners with a race,
I lay me down a littlewhile to breathe;
For strokes received, andmany blows repaid,
Have robb'd my strong-knitsinews of their strength,
And spite of spite needsmust I rest awhile.
Smile, gentle heaven! orstrike, ungentle death!
For this world frowns, andEdward's sun is clouded.
How now, my lord! whathap? what hope of good?
Our hap is loss, our hopebut sad despair;
Our ranks are broke, andruin follows us:
What counsel give you?whither shall we fly?
Bootless is flight, theyfollow us with wings;
And weak we are and cannotshun pursuit.
Ah, Warwick, why hast thouwithdrawn thyself?
Thy brother's blood thethirsty earth hath drunk,
Broach'd with the steelypoint of Clifford's lance;
And in the very pangs ofdeath he cried,
Like to a dismal clangourheard from far,
'Warwick, revenge! myson, revenge my death!'
So, underneath the bellyof their steeds,
That stain'd their fetlocksin his smoking blood,
The noble Salisbury gaveup the ghost.
Then let the earth bedrunken with our blood:
I'll kill my horse,because I will not fly.
Why stand we likesoft-hearted women here,
Wailing our losses, whilesthe foe doth rage;
And look upon, as if thetragedy
Were play'd in jest bycounterfeiting actors?
Here on my knee I vow toGod above,
I'll never pause again,never stand still,
Till either death hathclosed these eyes of mine
Or fortune given memeasure of revenge.
O Warwick, I do bend myknee with thine;
And in this vow do chainmy soul to thine!
And, ere my knee rise fromthe earth's cold face,
I throw my hands, mineeyes, my heart to thee,
Thou setter up and pluckerdown of kings,
Beseeching thee, if withthey will it stands
That to my foes this bodymust be prey,
Yet that thy brazen gatesof heaven may ope,
And give sweet passage tomy sinful soul!
Now, lords, take leaveuntil we meet again,
Where'er it be, in heavenor in earth.
Brother, give me thy hand;and, gentle Warwick,
Let me embrace thee in myweary arms:
Away, away! Once more,sweet lords farewell.
Yet let us all together toour troops,
And give them leave to flythat will not stay;
This may plant courage intheir quailing breasts;
For yet is hope of lifeand victory.
Forslow no longer, make wehence amain.
Clifford! Clifford!
Richard! Richard!
Now, Clifford, I havesingled thee alone:
Suppose this arm is forthe Duke of York,
And this for Rutland; bothbound to revenge,
Wert thou environ'd with abrazen wall.
Now, Richard, I am withthee here alone:
This is the hand thatstabb'd thy father York;
And this the hand thatslew thy brother Rutland;
And here's the heart thattriumphs in their death
And cheers these hands thatslew thy sire and brother
To execute the like uponthyself;
And so, have at thee!
Nay Warwick, single outsome other chase;
For I myself will huntthis wolf to death.
(drums sound. bugles blaring.clanging swords)
This battle fares like tothe morning's war,
When dying clouds contendwith growing light,
What time the shepherd,blowing of his nails,
Can neither call itperfect day nor night.
Now sways it this way,like a mighty sea
Forced by the tide tocombat with the wind;
Now sways it that way,like the selfsame sea
Forced to retire by furyof the wind:
Sometime the flood prevails,and then the wind;
Now one the better, thenanother best;
Both tugging to bevictors, breast to breast,
Yet neither conqueror norconquered:
So is the equal poise of thisfell war.
Here on this molehill willI sit me down.
To whom God will, there bethe victory!
For Margaret my queen, andClifford too,
Have chid me from thebattle; swearing both
They prosper best of allwhen I am thence.
Would I were dead! ifGod's good will were so;
For what is in this worldbut grief and woe?
O God! methinks it were ahappy life,
To be no better than ahomely swain;
To sit upon a hill, as Ido now,
To carve out dialsquaintly, point by point,
Thereby to see the minuteshow they run,
How many make the hourfull complete;
How many hours bring aboutthe day;
How many days will finishup the year;
How many years a mortalman may live.
When this is known, thento divide the times:
So many hours must I tendmy flock;
So many hours must I takemy rest;
So many hours must Icontemplate;
So many hours must I sportmyself;
So many days my ewes havebeen with young;
So many weeks ere the poorfools will ean:
So many years ere I shallshear the fleece:
So minutes, hours, days, weeks, months, and years,
Pass'd over to the endthey were created,
Would bring white hairsunto a quiet grave.
Ah, what a life were this!how sweet! how lovely!
Gives not the hawthorn-busha sweeter shade
To shepherds looking ontheir silly sheep,
Than doth a richembroider'd canopy
To kings that fear theirsubjects' treachery?
O, yes, it doth; athousand-fold it doth.
And to conclude, theshepherd's homely curds,
His cold thin drink out ofhis leather bottle.
His wonted sleep under afresh tree's shade,
All which secure andsweetly he enjoys,
Is far beyond a prince'sdelicates,
His viands sparkling in agolden cup,
His body couched in acurious bed,
When care, mistrust, andtreason waits on him.
Ill blows the wind thatprofits nobody.
This man, whom hand tohand I slew in fight,
May be possessed with somestore of crowns;
And I, that haply takethem from him now,
May yet ere night yieldboth my life and them
To some man else, as thisdead man doth me.
Who's this?
O God! it is my father's face,
Whom in this conflict Iunwares have kill'd.
O heavy times, begettingsuch events!
From London by the kingwas I press'd forth;
My father, being the Earlof Warwick's man,
Came on the part of York,press'd by his master;
And I, who at his handsreceived my life,
Have by my hands of lifebereaved him.
Pardon me, God, I knew notwhat I did!
And pardon, father, for Iknew not thee!
My tears shall wipe awaythese bloody marks;
And no more words till theyhave flow'd their fill.
O piteous spectacle! Obloody times!
Whiles lions war andbattle for their dens,
Poor harmless lambs abidetheir enmity.
Weep, wretched man, I'llaid thee tear for tear;
And let our hearts andeyes, like civil war,
Be blind with tears, andbreak o'ercharged with grief.
Thou that so stoutly hastresisted me,
Give me thy gold, if thouhast any gold:
For I have bought it withan hundred blows.
But let me see: is thisour foeman's face?
Ah, no, no, no, it is mineonly son!
Ah, boy, if any life beleft in thee,
Throw up thine eye! see,see what showers arise,
Blown with the windytempest of my heart,
Upon thy wounds, that killsmine eye and heart!
O, pity, God, thismiserable age!
What stratagems, how fell,how butcherly,
Erroneous, mutinous andunnatural,
This deadly quarrel dailydoth beget!
O boy, thy father gavethee life too soon,
And hath bereft thee ofthy life too late!
Woe above woe! grief morethan common grief!
O that my death would staythese ruthful deeds!
O pity, pity, gentleheaven, pity!
The red rose and the whiteare on his face,
The fatal colours of ourstriving houses:
The one his purple bloodright well resembles;
The other his pale cheeks,methinks, presenteth:
Wither one rose, and letthe other flourish;
If you contend, a thousandlives must wither.
How will my mother for afather's death
Take on with me and ne'erbe satisfied!
How will my wife forslaughter of my son
Shed seas of tears andne'er be satisfied!
How will the country forthese woful chances
Misthink the king and notbe satisfied!
Was ever son so rued afather's death?
Was ever father sobemoan'd his son?
Was ever king so grievedfor subjects' woe?
Much is your sorrow; mineten times so much.
I'll bear thee hence,where I may weep my fill.
These arms of mine shallbe thy winding-sheet;
My heart, sweet boy, shallbe thy sepulchre,
For from my heart thineimage ne'er shall go;
My sighing breast shall bethy funeral bell;
And so obsequious will thyfather be,
Even for the loss of thee,having no more,
As Priam was for all hisvaliant sons.
I'll bear thee hence; andlet them fight that will,
For I have murdered whereI should not kill.
Sad-hearted men, muchovergone with care,
Here sits a king morewoful than you are.
Fly, father, fly! for allyour friends are fled,
And Warwick rages like achafed bull:
Away! for death doth holdus in pursuit.
Mount you, my lord; towardsBerwick post amain:
Edward and Richard, like abrace of greyhounds
Having the fearful flyinghare in sight,
With fiery eyes sparklingfor very wrath,
And bloody steel grasp'din their ireful hands,
Are at our backs; andtherefore hence amain.
Away! for vengeance comesalong with them:
Nay, stay not toexpostulate, make speed;
Or else come after: I'llaway before.
Nay, take me with thee,good sweet Exeter:
Not that I fear to stay,but love to go
Whither the queen intends.Forward; away!
Here burns my candle out;ay, here it dies,
Which, whiles it lasted,gave King Henry light.
O Lancaster, I fear thyoverthrow
More than my body'sparting with my soul!
My love and fear gluedmany friends to thee;
And, now I fall, thy toughcommixture melts.
Impairing Henry,strengthening misproud York,
The common people swarmlike summer flies;
And whither fly the gnatsbut to the sun?
And who shines now butHenry's enemies?
O, Henry, hadst thousway'd as kings should do,
Or as thy father and hisfather did,
Giving no ground unto thehouse of York,
They never then had sprunglike summer flies;
I and ten thousand in thisluckless realm
Had left no mourningwidows for our death;
And thou this day hadstkept thy chair in peace.
For what doth cherishweeds but gentle air?
And what makes robbersbold but too much lenity?
Bootless are plaints, andcureless are my wounds;
No way to fly, nor strengthto hold out flight:
The foe is merciless, andwill not pity;
For at their hands I havedeserved no pity.
The air hath got into mydeadly wounds,
And much effuse of blooddoth make me faint.
Come, York and Richard,Warwick and the rest;
I stabb'd your fathers'bosoms, split my breast.
Now breathe we, lords: goodfortune bids us pause,
And smooth the frowns ofwar with peaceful looks.
Some troops pursue thebloody-minded queen,
That led calm Henry,though he were a king,
No, 'tis impossible heshould escape,
For, though before hisface I speak the words
Your brother Richardmark'd him for the grave:
And wheresoe'er he is,he's surely dead.
(sound of someone's last exhale)
Whose soul is that whichtakes her heavy leave?
A deadly groan, like lifeand death's departing.
See who it is: and, nowthe battle's ended,
If friend or foe, let himbe gently used.
Revoke that doom of mercy,for 'tis Clifford;
Who not contented that helopp'd the branch
In hewing Rutland when hisleaves put forth,
But set his murderingknife unto the root
From whence that tenderspray did sweetly spring,
I mean our princelyfather, Duke of York.
From off the gates of Yorkfetch down the head,
Your father's head, whichClifford placed there;
Instead whereof let thissupply the room:
Measure for measure mustbe answered.
Bring forth that fatalscreech-owl to our house,
That nothing sung butdeath to us and ours:
Now death shall stop hisdismal threatening sound,
And his ill-boding tongueno more shall speak.
I think his understandingis bereft.
Speak, Clifford, dost thouknow who speaks to thee?
Dark cloudy death o'ershadeshis beams of life,
And he nor sees nor hearsus what we say.
O, would he did! and soperhaps he doth:
'Tis but his policy tocounterfeit,
Because he would avoidsuch bitter taunts
Which in the time of deathhe gave our father.
If so thou think'st, vexhim with eager words.
Clifford, ask mercy andobtain no grace.
Clifford, repent inbootless penitence.
Clifford, devise excusesfor thy faults.
While we devise felltortures for thy faults.
Thou didst love York, andI am son to York.
Thou pitied'st Rutland; Iwill pity thee.
Where's Captain Margaret,to fence you now?
They mock thee, Clifford:swear as thou wast wont.
What, not an oath? nay,then the world goes hard
When Clifford cannot sparehis friends an oath.
I know by that he's dead;and, by my soul,
If this right hand wouldbuy two hour's life,
That I in all despitemight rail at him,
This hand should chop it off,and with it issuing blood
Stifle the villain whoseunstanched thirst
York and young Rutlandcould not satisfy.
Ay, but he's dead: offwith the traitor's head,
And rear it in the placeyour father's stands.
And now to London withtriumphant march,
There to be crownedEngland's royal king:
From whence shall Warwickcut the sea to France,
And ask the Lady Bona forthy queen:
So shalt thou sinew boththese lands together;
And, having France thyfriend, thou shalt not dread
The scatter'd foe thathopes to rise again;
For though they cannotgreatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have them buzzto offend thine ears.
First will I see thecoronation;
And then to Brittany I'llcross the sea,
To effect this marriage,so it please my lord.
Even as thou wilt, sweetWarwick, let it be;
For in thy shoulder do Ibuild my seat,
And never will I undertakethe thing
Wherein thy counsel andconsent is wanting.
Richard, I will createthee Duke of Gloucester,
And George, of Clarence:Warwick, as ourself,
Shall do and undo as himpleaseth best.
Let me be Duke of Clarence,George of Gloucester;
For Gloucester's dukedomis too ominous.
Tut, that's a foolishobservation:
Richard, be Duke ofGloucester. Now to London,
To see these honours inpossession.
Under this thick-grown brakewe'll shroud ourselves;
For through this gladeanon the deer will come;
And in this covert will wemake our stand,
Culling the principal ofall the deer.
I'll stay above the hill,so both may shoot.
That cannot be; the noiseof thy cross-bow
Will scare the herd, andso my shoot is lost.
Here stand we both, andaim we at the best:
And, for the time shallnot seem tedious,
I'll tell thee what befellme on a day
In this self-place wherenow we mean to stand.
Hey, here comes a man; let'sstay till he be past.
From Scotland am I stol'n,even of pure love,
To greet mine own landwith my wishful sight.
No, Harry, Harry, 'tis noland of thine;
Thy place is fill'd, thysceptre wrung from thee,
Thy balm wash'd off wherewiththou wast anointed:
No bending knee will callthee Caesar now,
No humble suitors press tospeak for right,
No, not a man comes forredress of thee;
For how can I help them,and not myself?
Ay, here's a deer whoseskin's a keeper's fee:
This is the quondam king;let's seize upon him.
Let me embrace thee, souradversity,
For wise men say it is thewisest course.
Why linger we? let us layhands upon him.
Forbear awhile; we'll heara little more.
My queen and son are goneto France for aid;
And, as I hear, the greatcommanding Warwick
Is thither gone, to cravethe French king's sister
To wife for Edward: ifthis news be true,
Poor queen and son, yourlabour is but lost;
For Warwick is a subtleorator,
And Lewis a prince soonwon with moving words.
By this account thenMargaret may win him;
For she's a woman to bepitied much:
Ay, but she's come to beg,Warwick to give;
She, on his left side,craving aid for Henry,
He, on his right, asking awife for Edward.
She weeps, and says herHenry is deposed;
He smiles, and says hisEdward is install'd;
That she, poor wretch, forgrief can speak no more;
Whiles Warwick tells histitle, smooths the wrong,
Inferreth arguments ofmighty strength,
And in conclusion wins theking from her,
With promise of hissister, and what else,
To strengthen and supportKing Edward's place.
O Margaret, thus 'twillbe; and thou, poor soul,
Art then forsaken, as thouwent'st forlorn!
Say, what art thou thattalk'st of kings and queens?
More than I seem, and lessthan I was born to:
A man at least, for less Ishould not be;
And men may talk of kings,and why not I?
Ay, but thou talk'st as ifthou wert a king.
Why, so I am, in mind; andthat's enough.
But, if thou be a king,where is thy crown?
My crown is in my heart,not on my head;
Not decked with diamondsand Indian stones,
Nor to be seen: my crownis called content:
A crown it is that seldomkings enjoy.
Well, if you be a kingcrown'd with content,
Your crown content and youmust be contented
To go along with us; foras we think,
You are the king KingEdward hath deposed;
And we his subjects swornin all allegiance
Will apprehend you as hisenemy.
But did you never swear,and break an oath?
No, never such an oath;nor will not now.
Where did you dwell when Iwas King of England?
Here in this country,where we now remain.
I was anointed king atnine months old;
My father and mygrandfather were kings,
And you were sworn truesubjects unto me:
And tell me, then, haveyou not broke your oaths?
No;
For we were subjects butwhile you were king.
Why, am I dead? do I notbreathe a man?
Ah, simple men, you knownot what you swear!
Look, as I blow thisfeather from my face,
And as the air blows it tome again,
Obeying with my wind whenI do blow,
And yielding to anotherwhen it blows,
Commanded always by thegreater gust;
Such is the lightness ofyou common men.
But do not break youroaths; for of that sin
My mild entreaty shall notmake you guilty.
Go where you will, theking shall be commanded;
And be you kings, command,and I'll obey.
We are true subjects tothe king, King Edward.
So would you be again toHenry,
If he were seated as KingEdward is.
We charge you, in God'sname, and the king's,
To go with us unto theofficers.
In God's name, lead; yourking's name be obey'd:
And what God will, thatlet your king perform;
And what he will, I humblyyield unto.
Brother of Gloucester, atSaint Alban's field
This lady's husband, SirJohn Grey, was slain,
His lands then seized onby the conqueror:
Her suit is now torepossess those lands;
Which we in justice cannotwell deny,
Because in quarrel of thehouse of York
The worthy gentleman didlose his life.
Your highness shall dowell to grant her suit;
It were dishonour to denyit her.
It were no less; but yetI'll make a pause.
Yea, is it so?
I see the lady hath athing to grant,
Before the king will granther humble suit.
He knows the game: howtrue he keeps the wind!
Silence!
Widow, we will consider ofyour suit;
And come some other timeto know our mind.
Right gracious lord, Icannot brook delay:
May it please your highnessto resolve me now;
And what your pleasure is,shall satisfy me.
Ay, widow? then I'll warrantyou all your lands,
An if what pleases himshall pleasure you.
Fight closer, or, goodfaith, you'll catch a clap.
I fear her not, unlessshe chance to fall.
Merry. God's forbot! forhe'll take vantages.
How many children hastthou, widow? tell me.
I think he means tobeg a child of her.
Nay, whip me then: he'llrather give her two.
Three, my most graciouslord.
You shall have four, ifyou'll be ruled by him.
'Twere pity they shouldlose their father's lands.
Be pitiful, dread lord,and grant it then.
Lords, give us leave: I'lltry this widow's wit.
Ay, good leave have you;for you will have leave,
Till youth take leave andleave you to the crutch.
Now tell me, madam, do youlove your children?
Ay, full as dearly as Ilove myself.
And would you not do muchto do them good?
To do them good, I wouldsustain some harm.
Then get your husband'slands, to do them good.
Therefore I came unto yourmajesty.
I'll tell you how theselands are to be got.
So shall you bind me toyour highness' service.
What service wilt thou dome, if I give them?
What you command, thatrests in me to do.
But you will takeexceptions to my boon.
No, gracious lord, exceptI cannot do it.
Ay, but thou canst do whatI mean to ask.
Why, then I will do whatyour grace commands.
He plies her hard; and muchrain wears the marble.
As red as fire! nay,then her wax must melt.
Why stops my lord, shall Inot hear my task?
An easy task; 'tis but tolove a king.
That's soon perform'd,because I am a subject.
Why, then, thy husband'slands I freely give thee.
I take my leave with manythousand thanks.
But stay thee, 'tis thefruits of love I mean.
The fruits of love I mean,my loving liege.
Ay, but, I fear me, inanother sense.
What love, think'st thou,I sue so much to get?
My love till death, myhumble thanks, my prayers;
That love which virtuebegs and virtue grants.
No, by my troth, I did notmean such love.
Why, then you mean not asI thought you did.
But now you partly mayperceive my mind.
My mind will never grantwhat I perceive
Your highness aims at, ifI aim aright.
To tell thee plain, I aimto lie with thee.
To tell you plain, I hadrather lie in prison.
Why, then thou shalt nothave thy husband's lands.
Why, then mine honestyshall be my dower;
For by that loss I willnot purchase them.
Therein thou wrong'st thychildren mightily.
Herein your highnesswrongs both them and me.
But, mighty lord, thismerry inclination
Accords not with thesadness of my suit:
Please you dismiss meeither with 'ay' or 'no.'
Ay, if thou wilt say 'ay'to my request;
No if thou dost say 'no'to my demand.
Then, no, my lord. My suitis at an end.
The widow likes him not,she knits her brows.
He is the bluntestwooer in Christendom.
Her looks do argue herreplete with modesty;
Her words do show her witincomparable;
All her perfectionschallenge sovereignty:
One way or other, she isfor a king;
And she shall be my love,or else my queen.--
Say that King Edward takethee for his queen?
'Tis better said thandone, my gracious lord:
I am a subject fit to jestwithal,
But far unfit to be asovereign.
Sweet widow, by my state Iswear to thee
I speak no more than whatmy soul intends;
And that is, to enjoy theefor my love.
And that is more than Iwill yield unto:
I know I am too mean to beyour queen,
And yet too good to beyour concubine.
You cavil, widow: I didmean, my queen.
'Twill grieve your grace mysons should call you father.
No more than when mydaughters call thee mother.
Thou art a widow, and thouhast some children;
And, by God's mother, I,being but a bachelor,
Have other some: why, 'tisa happy thing
To be the father unto manysons.
Answer no more, for thoushalt be my queen.
The ghostly father nowhath done his shrift.
When he was made ashriver, 'twas for shift.
Brothers, you muse whatchat we two have had.
The widow likes it not,for she looks vexed.
You'll think it strange ifI should marry her.
To whom, my lord?
Why, Clarence, to myself.
That would be ten days'wonder at the least.
That's a day longer than awonder lasts.
By so much is the wonderin extremes.
Well, jest on, brothers: Ican tell you both
Her suit is granted forher husband's lands.
My gracious lord, Henryyour foe is taken,
And brought your prisonerto your palace gate.
See that he be convey'dunto the Tower:
And go we, brothers, tothe man that took him,
To question of hisapprehension.
Sweet widow, go you along.Lords, use her honourably.
Ay, Edward will use womenhonourably.
Would he were wasted,marrow, bones and all,
That from his loins nohopeful branch may spring,
To cross me from thegolden time I look for!
And yet, between my soul'sdesire and me--
The lustful Edward's titleburied--
Is Clarence, Henry, andhis son young Edward,
And all the unlook'd forissue of their bodies,
To take their rooms, ere Ican plant myself:
A cold premeditation formy purpose!
Why, then, I do but dreamon sovereignty;
Like one that stands upona promontory,
And spies a far-off shorewhere he would tread,
Wishing his foot wereequal with his eye,
And chides the sea thatsunders him from thence,
Saying, he'll lade it dryto have his way:
So do I wish the crown,being so far off;
And so I chide the meansthat keeps me from it;
And so I say, I'll cut thecauses off,
Flattering me withimpossibilities.
My eye's too quick, myheart o'erweens too much,
Unless my hand andstrength could equal them.
Well, say there is nokingdom then for Richard;
What other pleasure canthe world afford?
I'll make my heaven in alady's lap,
And deck my body in gayornaments,
And witch sweet ladieswith my words and looks.
O miserable thought! andmore unlikely
Than to accomplish twentygolden crowns!
Why, love forswore me inmy mother's womb:
And, for I should not dealin her soft laws,
She did corrupt frailnature with some bribe,
To shrink mine arm up likea wither'd shrub;
To make an enviousmountain on my back,
Where sits deformity tomock my body;
To shape my legs of anunequal size;
To disproportion me inevery part,
Like to a chaos, or anunlick'd bear-whelp
That carries no impressionlike the dam.
And am I then a man to bebeloved?
O monstrous fault, toharbour such a thought!
Then, since this earthaffords no joy to me,
But to command, to cheque,to o'erbear such
As are of better personthan myself,
I'll make my heaven todream upon the crown,
And, whiles I live, toaccount this world but hell,
Until my mis-shaped trunkthat bears this head
Be round impaled with aglorious crown.
And yet I know not how toget the crown,
For many lives standbetween me and home:
And I,--like one lost in athorny wood,
That rends the thorns andis rent with the thorns,
Seeking a way and strayingfrom the way;
Not knowing how to findthe open air,
But toiling desperately tofind it out,--
Torment myself to catchthe English crown:
And from that torment Iwill free myself,
Or hew my way out with abloody axe.
Why, I can smile, andmurder whiles I smile,
And cry 'Content' to thatwhich grieves my heart,
And wet my cheeks withartificial tears,
And frame my face to alloccasions.
I'll drown more sailorsthan the mermaid shall;
I'll slay more gazers thanthe basilisk;
I'll play the orator aswell as Nestor,
Deceive more slily thanUlysses could,
And, like a Sinon, takeanother Troy.
I can add colours to thechameleon,
Change shapes with Proteusfor advantages,
And set the murderousMachiavel to school.
Can I do this, and cannotget a crown?
Tut, were it farther off,I'll pluck it down.
Fair Queen of England,worthy Margaret,
Sit down with us: it illbefits thy state
And birth, that thou shouldststand while Lewis doth sit.
No, mighty King of France:now Margaret
Must strike her sail andlearn awhile to serve
Where kings command. Iwas, I must confess,
Great Albion's queen informer golden days:
But now mischance hathtrod my title down,
And with dishonour laid meon the ground;
Where I must take likeseat unto my fortune,
And to my humble stateconform myself.
Why, say, fair queen, whencesprings this deep despair?
From such a cause as fillsmine eyes with tears
And stops my tongue, whileheart is drown'd in cares.
Whate'er it be, be thoustill like thyself,
And sit thee by our side:
Yield not thy neck
To fortune's yoke, but letthy dauntless mind
Still ride in triumph overall mischance.
Be plain, Queen Margaret,and tell thy grief;
It shall be eased, ifFrance can yield relief.
Those gracious words revivemy drooping thoughts
And give my tongue-tiedsorrows leave to speak.
Now, therefore, be itknown to noble Lewis,
That Henry, sole possessorof my love,
Is of a king become abanish'd man,
And forced to live inScotland a forlorn;
While proud ambitiousEdward Duke of York
Usurps the regal title andthe seat
Of England's true-anointedlawful king.
This is the cause that I,poor Margaret,
With this my son, PrinceEdward, Henry's heir,
Am come to crave thy justand lawful aid;
And if thou fail us, allour hope is done:
Scotland hath will tohelp, but cannot help;
Our people and our peersare both misled,
Our treasures seized, oursoldiers put to flight,
And, as thou seest,ourselves in heavy plight.
Renowned queen, withpatience calm the storm,
While we bethink a meansto break it off.
The more we stay, thestronger grows our foe.
The more I stay, the moreI'll succor thee.
O, but impatience waitethon true sorrow.
And see where comes thebreeder of my sorrow!
What's he approachethboldly to our presence?
Our Earl of Warwick,Edward's greatest friend.
Welcome, brave Warwick!What brings thee to France?
Ay, now begins a secondstorm to rise;
For this is he that movesboth wind and tide.
From worthy Edward, Kingof Albion,
My lord and sovereign, andthy vowed friend,
I come, in kindness andunfeigned love,
First, to do greetings tothy royal person;
And then to crave a leagueof amity;
And lastly, to confirmthat amity
With a nuptial knot, ifthou vouchsafe to grant
That virtuous Lady Bona,thy fair sister,
To England's king inlawful marriage.
If that go forward,Henry's hope is done.
And, gracious madam, inour king's behalf,
I am commanded, with yourleave and favour,
Humbly to kiss your hand,and with my tongue
To tell the passion of mysovereign's heart;
Where fame, late enteringat his heedful ears,
Hath placed thy beauty'simage and thy virtue.
King Lewis and Lady Bona,hear me speak,
Before you answerWarwick. His demand
Springs not from Edward'swell-meant honest love,
But from deceitbred by necessity;
For how can tyrants safelygovern home,
Unless abroad theypurchase great alliance?
To prove him tyrant thisreason may suffice,
That Henry liveth still:but were he dead,
Yet here Prince Edwardstands, King Henry's son.
Look, therefore, Lewis, thatby this league and marriage
Thou draw not on thydanger and dishonour;
For though usurpers swaythe rule awhile,
Yet heavens are just, andtime suppresseth wrongs.
Injurious Margaret!
And why not queen?
Because thy father Henrydid usurp;
And thou no more areprince than she is queen.
Then Warwick disannulsgreat John of Gaunt,
Which did subdue thegreatest part of Spain;
And, after John of Gaunt,Henry the Fourth,
Whose wisdom was a mirrorto the wisest;
And, after that wiseprince, Henry the Fifth,
Who by his prowessconquered all France:
From these our Henrylineally descends.
Oxford, how haps it, inthis smooth discourse,
You told not how Henry theSixth hath lost
All that which Henry Fifthhad gotten?
Methinks these peers ofFrance should smile at that.
But for the rest, you tella pedigree
Of threescore and twoyears; a silly time
To make prescriptionfor a kingdom's worth.
Why, Warwick, canst thouspeak against thy liege,
Whom thou obeyed'st thirtyand six years,
And not bewray thy treasonwith a blush?
Can Oxford, that did everfence the right,
Now buckler falsehood witha pedigree?
For shame! leave Henry,and call Edward king.
Call him my king by whoseinjurious doom
My elder brother, the LordAubrey Vere,
Was done to death? andmore than so, my father,
Even in the downfall ofhis mellow'd years,
When nature brought him tothe door of death?
No, Warwick, no; whilelife upholds this arm,
This arm upholds the houseof Lancaster.
And I the house of York.
Queen Margaret, PrinceEdward, and Oxford,
Vouchsafe, at our request,to stand aside,
While I use furtherconference with Warwick.
Heavens grant that Warwick'swords bewitch him not!
Now Warwick, tell me, evenupon thy conscience,
Is Edward your true king?for I were loath
To link with him that werenot lawful chosen.
Thereon I pawn my creditand mine honour.
But is he gracious in thepeople's eye?
The more that Henry wasunfortunate.
Then further, alldissembling set aside,
Tell me for truth themeasure of his love
Unto our sister Bona.
Such it seems
As may beseem amonarch like himself.
Myself have often heardhim say and swear
That this his love was aneternal plant,
Whereof the root was fix'din virtue's ground,
The leaves and fruitmaintain'd with beauty's sun,
Exempt from envy, but notfrom disdain,
Unless the Lady Bona quithis pain.
Now, sister, let us hearyour firm resolve.
Your grant, or yourdenial, shall be mine:
Yet I confess that oftenere this day,
When I have heard yourking's desert recounted,
Mine ear hath temptedjudgment to desire.
Then, Warwick, thus: oursister shall be Edward's;
And now forthwith shallarticles be drawn
Touching the jointure thatyour king must make,
Which with her dowry shallbe counterpoised.
Draw near, Queen Margaret,and be a witness
That Bona shall be wife tothe English king.
To Edward, but not to theEnglish king.
Deceitful Warwick! it wasthy device
By this alliance to makevoid my suit:
Before thy coming Lewiswas Henry's friend.
And still is friend to himand Margaret:
But if your title to thecrown be weak,
As may appear by Edward'sgood success,
Then 'tis but reason thatI be released
From giving aid which lateI promised.
Yet shall you have allkindness at my hand
That your estate requiresand mine can yield.
Henry now lives inScotland at his ease,
Where having nothing,nothing can he lose.
And as for you yourself,our quondam queen,
You have a father able tomaintain you;
And better 'twere youtroubled him than France.
Peace, impudent andshameless Warwick, peace,
Proud setter up and pullerdown of kings!
I will not hence, till,with my talk and tears,
Both full of truth, I makeKing Lewis behold
Thy sly conveyance and thylord's false love;
For both of you are birdsof selfsame feather.
(horns sound)
Warwick, this is some postto us or thee.
My lord ambassador, theseletters are for you,
Sent from your brother,Marquess Montague:
These from our king untoyour majesty:
And, madam, these for you;from whom I know not.
Warwick, what are thy news?and yours, fair queen?
Mine, such as fill myheart with unhoped joys.
Mine, full of sorrow andheart's discontent.
What! has your kingmarried the Lady Grey!
And now, to soothe yourforgery and his,
Sends me a paper topersuade me patience?
Is this the alliance thathe seeks with France?
Dare he presume to scornus in this manner?
I told your majesty asmuch before:
This proveth Edward's loveand Warwick's honesty.
King Lewis, I here protest,in sight of heaven,
And by the hope I have ofheavenly bliss,
That I am clear from thismisdeed of Edward's,
No more my king, for hedishonours me,
But most himself, if hecould see his shame.
Did I impale him with theregal crown?
Did I put Henry from hisnative right?
And am I guerdon'd at thelast with shame?
Shame on himself! for mydesert is honour:
And to repair my honourlost for him,
I here renounce him andreturn to Henry.
My noble queen, let formergrudges pass,
And henceforth I am thytrue servitor:
I will revenge his wrongto Lady Bona,
And replant Henry in hisformer state.
Warwick, these words haveturn'd my hate to love;
And I forgive and quiteforget old faults,
And joy that thou becomestKing Henry's friend.
So much his friend, ay,his unfeigned friend,
That, if King Lewisvouchsafe to furnish us
With some few bands ofchosen soldiers,
I'll undertake to landthem on our coast
And force the tyrant fromhis seat by war.
Dear brother, how shallBona be revenged
But by thy help to thisdistressed queen?
Renowned prince, how shallpoor Henry live,
Unless thou rescue himfrom foul despair?
My quarrel and thisEnglish queen's are one.
And mine, fair lady Bona,joins with yours.
And mine with hers, andthine, and Margaret's.
Therefore at last I firmlyam resolved
You shall have aid.
Let me give humble thanksfor all at once.
Then, England's messenger,return in post,
And tell false Edward, thysupposed king,
That Lewis of France issending over masquers
To revel it with him andhis new bride:
Thou seest what's past, gofear thy king withal.
Tell him, in hope he'llprove a widower shortly,
I'll wear the willowgarland for his sake.
Tell him, my mourningweeds are laid aside,
And I am ready to putarmour on.
Tell him from me that hehath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrownhim ere't be long.
There's thy reward: begone.
But, Warwick,
Thou and Oxford, with fivethousand men,
Shall cross the seas, andbid false Edward battle;
And, as occasion serves,this noble queen
And prince shall followwith a fresh supply.
Yet, ere thou go, butanswer me one doubt,
What pledge have we of thyfirm loyalty?
This shall assure myconstant loyalty,
That if our queen and thisyoung prince agree,
I'll join mine eldestdaughter and my joy
To him forthwith in holywedlock bands.
Yes, I agree, and thankyou for your motion.
Son Edward, she is fairand virtuous,
Therefore delay not, givethy hand to Warwick;
And, with thy hand, thyfaith irrevocable,
That only Warwick'sdaughter shall be thine.
Yes, I accept her, for shewell deserves it;
And here, to pledge myvow, I give my hand.
Why stay we now? Thesesoldiers shall be levied,
I long till Edward fall bywar's mischance,
For mocking marriage witha dame of France.
I came from Edward asambassador,
But I return his sworn andmortal foe:
Matter of marriage was thecharge he gave me,
But dreadful war shallanswer his demand.
Had he none else to make astale but me?
Then none but I shall turnhis jest to sorrow.
I was the chief thatraised him to the crown,
And I'll be chief to bringhim down again:
Not that I pity Henry'smisery,
But seek revenge onEdward's mockery.
(cheers and horns)
Now tell me, brotherClarence, what think you
Of this new marriage withthe Lady Grey?
Hath not our brother madea worthy choice?
Alas, you know, 'tis farfrom hence to France;
How could he stay tillWarwick made return?
My lords, forbear thistalk; here comes the king.
And his well-chosen bride.
I mind to tell him plainlywhat I think.
Now, brother of Clarence,how like you our choice,
That you stand pensive, ashalf malcontent?
As well as Lewis of France,or the Earl of Warwick,
Which are so weak ofcourage and in judgment
That they'll take nooffence at our abuse.
Suppose they take offencewithout a cause,
They are but Lewis andWarwick: I am Edward,
Your king and Warwick's,and must have my will.
And shall have your will,because our king:
Yet hasty marriage seldomproveth well.
Yea, brother Richard, areyou offended too?
No, God forbid that Ishould wish them sever'd
Whom God hath join'dtogether; ay, and 'twere pity
To sunder them that yokeso well together.
(laughing)
Setting your scorns andyour mislike aside,
Tell me some reason whythe Lady Grey
Should not become my wifeand England's queen.
And you too, Somerset andMontague,
Speak freely what youthink.
Then this is mine opinion:that King Lewis
Becomes your enemy, formocking him
About the marriage of theLady Bona.
And Warwick, doing whatyou gave in charge,
Is now dishonoured by thisnew marriage.
What if both Lewis andWarwick be appeased
By such invention as I candevise?
Yet, to have join'd withFrance in such alliance
Would more have strengthen'dthis our commonwealth
'Gainst foreign storms thanany home-bred marriage.
Why, knows not Montaguethat of itself
England is safe, if truewithin itself?
But the safer when 'tisback'd with France.
'Tis better using Francethan trusting France:
Let us be back'd with Godand with the seas
Which He hath given forfence impregnable,
And with their helps onlydefend ourselves;
In them and in ourselvesour safety lies.
For this one speech LordHastings well deserves
To have the heir of theLord Hungerford.
Ay, what of that? it wasmy will and grant;
And for this once my willshall stand for law.
And yet methinks yourgrace hath not done well,
To give the heir anddaughter of Lord Scales
Unto the brother of yourloving bride;
She better would havefitted me or Clarence:
But in your bride you burybrotherhood.
Or else you would not havebestow'd the heir
Of the Lord Bonville onyour new wife's son,
And leave your brothers togo speed elsewhere.
Alas, poor Clarence! is itfor a wife
That thou art malcontent?I will provide thee.
In choosing for yourself,you show'd your judgment,
Which being shallow, yougive me leave
To play the broker in mineown behalf;
And to that end I shortlymind to leave you.
Leave me, or tarry, Edwardwill be king,
And not be tied unto hisbrother's will.
My lords, before itpleased his majesty
To raise my state to titleof a queen,
Do me but right, and youmust all confess
That I was not ignoble ofdescent;
And meaner than myselfhave had like fortune.
But as this title honoursme and mine,
So your dislike, to whom Iwould be pleasing,
Doth cloud my joys withdanger and with sorrow.
My love, forbear to fawnupon their frowns:
What danger or what sorrowcan befall thee,
So long as Edward is thyconstant friend,
And their true sovereign,whom they must obey?
Nay, whom they shall obey,and love thee too,
Unless they seek forhatred at my hands;
Which if they do, yet willI keep thee safe,
And they shall feel thevengeance of my wrath.
I hear, yet say not much,but think the more.
Now, messenger, whatletters or what news
From France?
My sovereign liege, noletters; and few words,
But such as I, withoutyour special pardon,
Dare not relate.
Go to, we pardon thee:therefore, in brief,
Tell me their words as nearas thou canst guess them.
What answer makes KingLewis unto our letters?
At my depart, these werehis very words:
'Go tell false Edward, thysupposed king,
That Lewis of France issending over masquers
To revel it with him andhis new bride.'
Is Lewis so brave? belikehe thinks me Henry.
But what said Lady Bona tomy marriage?
These were her words,utter'd with mad disdain:
'Tell him, in hope he'llprove a widower shortly,
I'll wear the willowgarland for his sake.'
I blame not her, she couldsay little less;
She had the wrong. Butwhat said Henry's queen?
For I have heard that shewas there in place.
'Tell him,' quoth she, 'mymourning weeds are done,
And I am ready to putarmour on.'
Belike she minds to playthe Amazon.
But what said Warwick tothese injuries?
He, more incensed againstyour majesty
Than all the rest, dischargedme with these words:
'Tell him from me that hehath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrownhim ere't be long.'
Ha! durst the traitorbreathe out so proud words?
Well I will arm me, beingthus forewarn'd:
They shall have wars andpay for their presumption.
But say, is Warwickfriends with Margaret?
Ay, gracious sovereign; theyare so link'd in friendship
That young Prince Edwardmarries Warwick's daughter.
Belike the elder; Clarencewill have the younger.
Now, brother king,farewell, and sit you fast,
For I will hence toWarwick's other daughter;
That, though I want akingdom, yet in marriage
I may not prove inferiorto yourself.
You that love me andWarwick, follow me.
Not I:
My thoughts aim at afurther matter; I
Stay not for the love ofEdward, but the crown.
Clarence and Somerset bothgone to Warwick!
Yet am I arm'd against theworst can happen;
And haste is needful inthis desperate case.
Go levy men, and makeprepare for war;
Myself in person willstraight follow you.
But, ere I go, Hastingsand Montague,
Resolve my doubt. Youtwain, of all the rest,
Are near to Warwick byblood and by alliance:
Tell me if you loveWarwick more than me?
If it be so, then bothdepart to him;
I rather wish you foesthan hollow friends:
But if you mind to holdyour true obedience,
Give me assurance withsome friendly vow,
That I may never have youin suspect.
So God help Montague as heproves true!
And Hastings as he favoursEdward's cause!
Now, brother Richard, willyou stand by us?
Ay, in despite of all thatshall withstand you.
Why, so! then am I sure ofvictory.
Now therefore let ushence; and lose no hour,
Till we meet Warwick withhis foreign power.
Trust me, my lord, allhitherto goes well;
The common people bynumbers swarm to us.
But see where Somerset andClarence come!
Speak suddenly, my lords,are we all friends?
Fear not that, my lord.
Then, gentle Clarence,welcome unto Warwick;
And welcome, Somerset: Ihold it cowardice
To rest mistrustful wherea noble heart
Hath pawn'd an open handin sign of love;
Else might I think thatClarence, Edward's brother,
Were but a feigned friendto our proceedings:
But come, sweet Clarence;my daughter shall be thine.
And now what rests but, innight's coverture,
Thy brother beingcarelessly encamp'd,
His soldiers lurking inthe towns about,
And but attended by asimple guard,
We may surprise and takehim at our pleasure?
Our scouts have found theadventure very easy:
So we, well cover'd withthe night's black mantle,
At unawares may beat downEdward's guard
And seize himself; I saynot, slaughter him,
For I intend but only tosurprise him.
You that will follow me tothis attempt,
Applaud the name of Henrywith your leader.
Henry! Henry! Henry
Why, then, let's on ourway in silent sort:
For Warwick and his friends,God and Saint George!
Come on, my masters, eachman take his stand:
The king by this is sethim down to sleep.
What, will he not to bed?
Why, no; for he hath madea solemn vow
Never to lie and take hisnatural rest
Till Warwick or himself bequite suppress'd.
To-morrow then belikeshall be the day,
If Warwick be so near asmen report.
But say, I pray, whatnobleman is that
That with the king hereresteth in his tent?
'Tis the Lord Hastings, theking's chiefest friend.
O, is it so? But whycommands the king
That his chief followerslodge in towns about him,
While he himself keeps inthe cold field?
'Tis the more honour,because more dangerous.
Ay, but give me worshipand quietness;
I like it better than adangerous honour.
If Warwick knew in whatestate he stands,
'Tis to be doubted hewould waken him.
Unless our halberds didshut up his passage.
Ay, wherefore else guardwe his royal tent,
But to defend his personfrom night-foes?
(whistles sound from differentdirections)
Who goes there?
(whistle)
Stay, or thou diest!
(screams)
What are they that flythere?
Richard and Hastings: letthem go; here is The duke.
Why, Warwick,when we parted,
Thou call'dst me king.
Ay, but the case isalter'd:
When you disgraced me inmy embassade,
Then I degraded you frombeing king,
And come now to create youDuke of York.
Alas! how should yougovern any kingdom,
That know not how to useambassadors,
Nor how to be contentedwith one wife,
Nor how to use yourbrothers brotherly,
Nor how to study for thepeople's welfare,
Nor how to shroud yourselffrom enemies?
Yea, brother of Clarence,are thou here too?
Nay, then I see thatEdward needs must down.
Yet, Warwick, in despiteof all mischance,
Of thee thyself and allthy complices,
Edward will always bearhimself as king:
Though fortune's maliceoverthrow my state,
My mind exceeds thecompass of her wheel.
Then, for his mind, beEdward England's king:
But Henry now shall wearthe English crown,
And be true king indeed,thou but the shadow.
My Lord of Somerset, at myrequest,
See that forthwith DukeEdward be convey'd
Unto my brother,Archbishop of York.
So, for a while farewell,good Duke of York.
What fates impose, thatmen must needs abide;
It boots not to resistboth wind and tide.
What now remains, mylords, for us to do
But march to London withour soldiers?
Ay, that's the first thingthat we have to do;
To free King Henry fromimprisonment
And see him seated in theregal throne.
These news I must confessare full of grief;
Yet, dearest sister, bearit as you may:
Warwick may lose, that nowhath won the day.
Till then fair hope musthinder life's decay.
And I the rather wean mefrom despair
For love of Edward'soffspring in my womb:
This is it that makes mebridle passion
And bear with mildness mymisfortune's cross;
Ay, ay, for this I draw inmany a tear
And stop the rising ofblood-sucking sighs,
Lest with my sighs ortears I blast or drown
King Edward's fruit, trueheir to the English crown.
But, madam, where isWarwick then become?
I am inform'd that hecomes towards London,
To set the crown once moreon Henry's head:
Guess thou the rest; KingEdward's friends must down,
But, to prevent thetyrant's violence,--
For trust not him thathath once broken faith,--
I'll hence forthwith untothe sanctuary,
To save at least the heirof Edward's right:
There shall I rest securefrom force and fraud.
Come, therefore, let usfly while we may fly:
If Warwick take us we aresure to die.
Now, my Lord Hastings andSir William Stanley,
Leave off to wonder why Idrew you hither,
Into this chiefest thicketof the park.
Thus stands the case: youknow our king, my brother,
Is prisoner to the bishophere, at whose hands
He hath good usage andgreat liberty,
And, often but attendedwith weak guard,
Comes hunting this way todisport himself.
I have advertised him bysecret means
That if about this hour hemake this way
He shall here find hisfriends with horse and men
To set him free from hiscaptivity.
This way, my lord; forthis way lies the game.
Nay, this way, man: seewhere the huntsmen stand.
Now, brother of Gloucester,Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Stand you thus close, tosteal the bishop's deer?
Brother, the time and caserequireth haste:
Your horse stands ready atthe park-corner.
But whither shall we then?
To Lynn, my lord,
And ship from thence toFlanders.
Well guess'd, believe me;for that was my meaning.
Stanley, I will requitethy forwardness.
But wherefore stay we?'tis no time to talk.
Huntsman, what say'stthou? wilt thou go along?
Better do so than tarryand be hang'd.
Come then, away; let's ha'no more ado.
Bishop, farewell: shieldthee from Warwick's frown;
And pray that I mayrepossess the crown.
Master lieutenant, nowthat God and friends
Have shaken Edward fromthe regal seat,
And turn'd my captivestate to liberty,
My fear to hope, mysorrows unto joys,
At our enlargement whatare thy due fees?
Subjects may challengenothing of their sovereigns;
But if an humble prayermay prevail,
I then crave pardon ofyour majesty.
For what, lieutenant? forwell using me?
Nay, be thou sure I'llwell requite thy kindness,
For that it made myimprisonment a pleasure;
Ay, such a pleasure asincaged birds
Conceive when after manymoody thoughts
At last by notes ofhousehold harmony
They quite forget theirloss of liberty.
But, Warwick, after God,thou set'st me free,
And chiefly therefore Ithank God and thee;
He was the author, thouthe instrument.
Therefore, that I mayconquer fortune's spite
By living low, wherefortune cannot hurt me,
And that the people ofthis blessed land
May not be punish'd withmy thwarting stars,
Warwick, although my headstill wear the crown,
I here resign mygovernment to thee,
For thou art fortunate inall thy deeds.
Your grace hath still beenfamed for virtuous;
And now may seem as wiseas virtuous,
By spying and avoidingfortune's malice,
For few men rightly temperwith the stars:
Yet in this one thing letme blame your grace,
For choosing me whenClarence is in place.
No, Warwick, thou artworthy of the sway,
To whom the heavens in thynativity
Adjudged an olive branchand laurel crown,
As likely to be blest inpeace and war;
And therefore I yield theemy free consent.
And I choose Clarence onlyfor protector.
Warwick and Clarence giveme both your hands:
Now join your hands, andwith your hands your hearts,
That no dissension hindergovernment:
I make you both protectorsof this land,
While I myself will lead aprivate life
And in devotion spend mylatter days,
To sin's rebuke and myCreator's praise.
What answers Clarence tohis sovereign's will?
That he consents, ifWarwick yield consent;
For on thy fortune Irepose myself.
Why, then, though loath,yet must I be content:
We'll yoke together, likea double shadow
To Henry's body, andsupply his place;
I mean, in bearing weightof government,
While he enjoys the honourand his ease.
And, Clarence, now then itis more than needful
Forthwith that Edward bepronounced a traitor,
And all his lands andgoods be confiscate.
What else? and thatsuccession be determined.
Ay, therein Clarence shallnot want his part.
But, with the first of allyour chief affairs,
Let me entreat, for Icommand no more,
That Margaret your queenand my son Edward
Be sent for, to returnfrom France with speed;
For, till I see them here,by doubtful fear
My joy of liberty is halfeclipsed.
It shall be done, mysovereign, with all speed.
My Lord of Somerset, whatyouth is that,
Of whom you seem to haveso tender care?
My liege, it is youngHenry, earl of Richmond.
Come hither, England'shope.
If secret powers
Suggest but truth to mydivining thoughts,
This pretty lad will proveour country's bliss.
His looks are full ofpeaceful majesty,
His head by nature framedto wear a crown,
His hand to wield asceptre, and himself
Likely in time to bless aregal throne.
Make much of him, mylords, for this is he
Must help you more thanyou are hurt by me.
(trumpets sound)
What news, my friend?
That Edward is escapedfrom your brother,
And fled, as he hearssince, to Burgundy.
Unsavoury news! but howmade he escape?
He was convey'd by RichardDuke of Gloucester
And the Lord Hastings, whoattended him
In secret ambush on theforest side
And from the bishop'shuntsmen rescued him;
For hunting was his dailyexercise.
My brother was toocareless of his charge.
But let us hence, mysovereign, to provide
A salve for any sore thatmay betide.
My lord, I like not ofthis flight of Edward's;
For doubtless Burgundywill yield him help,
And we shall have morewars before 't be long.
As Henry's late presagingprophecy
Did glad my heart with hopeof this young Richmond,
So doth my heart misgiveme, in these conflicts
What may befall him, tohis harm and ours:
Therefore, Lord Oxford, toprevent the worst,
Forthwith we'll send himhence to Brittany,
Till storms be past ofcivil enmity.
Ay, for if Edwardrepossess the crown,
'Tis like that Richmondwith the rest shall down.
It shall be so; he shallto Brittany.
Come, therefore, let'sabout it speedily.
Now, brother Richard,Hastings, and Lord Stanley,
Yet thus far fortunemaketh us amends,
And says that once more Ishall interchange
My waned state for Henry'sregal crown.
Well have we pass'd andnow repass'd the seas
And brought desired helpfrom Burgundy:
What then remains, webeing thus arrived
From Ravenspurgh havenbefore the gates of York,
But that we enter, as intoour dukedom?
The gates made fast!Brother, I like not this;
For many men that stumbleat the threshold
Are well foretold thatdanger lurks within.
Tush, man, abodements mustnot now affright us:
By fair or foul means wemust enter in,
For hither will ourfriends repair to us.
My liege, I'll knock oncemore to summon them.
My lords, we wereforewarned of your coming,
And shut the gates forsafety of ourselves;
For now we owe allegianceunto Henry.
But, master mayor, ifHenry be your king,
Yet Edward at the least isDuke of York.
True, my good lord; I knowyou for no less.
Why, and I challengenothing but my dukedom,
As being well content withthat alone.
But when the fox hath oncegot in his nose,
He'll soon find means tomake the body follow.
Why, master mayor, whystand you in a doubt?
Open the gates; we areKing Henry's friends.
Ay, say you so? the gatesshall then be open'd.
A wise stout captain, andsoon persuaded!
The good old man wouldfain that all were well,
So 'twere not 'long ofhim; but being enter'd,
I doubt not, I, but weshall soon persuade
Both him and all hisbrothers unto reason.
So, master mayor: thesegates must not be shut
But in the night or in thetime of war.
What! fear not, man, butyield me up the keys;
For Edward will defend thetown and thee,
And all those friends thatdeign to follow me.
(drums)
Brother, this is Sir JohnMontgomery,
Our trusty friend, unlessI be deceived.
Welcome, Sir John! But whycome you in arms?
To help King Edward in histime of storm,
As every loyal subjectought to do.
Thanks, good Montgomery;but we now forget
Our title to the crown andonly claim
Our dukedom till Godplease to send the rest.
Then fare you well, for Iwill hence again:
I came to serve a king andnot a duke.
Drummer, strike up, andlet us march away.
Nay, stay, Sir John, awhile, and we'll debate
By what safe means thecrown may be recover'd.
What talk you of debating?In few words,
If you'll not here proclaimyourself our king,
I'll leave you to yourfortune and be gone
To keep them back thatcome to succor you:
Why shall we fight, if youpretend no title?
(group) Ay!
Why, brother, whereforestand you on nice points?
Resolve yourself and let usclaim the crown.
When we grow stronger,then we'll make our claim:
Till then, 'tis wisdom toconceal our meaning.
Away with scrupulous wit!now arms must rule.
And fearless minds climbsoonest unto crowns.
Brother, we will proclaimyou out of hand:
The brut thereof willbring you many friends.
Then be it as you will;for 'tis my right,
And Henry but usurps thediadem.
Ay, now my sovereignspeaketh like himself;
And now will I be Edward'schampion.
Sound trumpet; Edwardshall be here proclaim'd:
Come, master-mayor, makethou proclamation.
(trumpet sounds, crowd cheers)
Edward the Fourth, by thegrace of God, king of
England and France, andlord of Ireland.
True and just heir, Duke ofYork, Earl of March and Ulster
And whosoe'er gainsaysKing Edward's right,
By this I challenge him tosingle fight.
(trumpet sounds. crowd cheers)
Long live Edward theFourth!
Thanks, brave Montgomery;and thanks unto you all:
If fortune serve me, I'llrequite this kindness.
Now, for this night, let'sharbour here in York;
And when the morning sunshall raise his car
Above the border of thishorizon,
We'll forward towardsWarwick and his mates;
For well I wot that Henryis no soldier.
Come on, brave soldiers:doubt not of the day,
And, that once gotten,doubt not of large pay.
(bells ring)
What counsel, lords?
For Edward now dothmarch amain to London;
And many giddy peopleflock to him.
Let's levy men, and beathim back again.
A little fire is quicklytrodden out;
Which, being suffer'd,rivers cannot quench.
In Warwickshire I havetrue-hearted friends,
Those will I muster up:and thou, son Clarence,
Shalt stir up in Suffolk,Norfolk, and in Kent,
The knights and gentlemento come with thee:
Thou, brother Montague, inBuckingham,
Northampton and inLeicestershire, shalt find
Men well inclined to hearwhat thou command'st:
And thou, brave Oxford,wondrous well beloved,
In Oxfordshire shaltmuster up thy friends.
My sovereign, with theloving citizens,
Like to his island girt inwith the ocean,
Or modest Dian circledwith her nymphs,
Shall rest in London tillwe come to him.
Fair lords, take leave andstand not to reply.
Farewell, my sovereign.
Farewell, my Hector, andmy Troy's true hope.
In sign of truth, I kissyour highness' hand.
Well-minded Clarence, bethou fortunate!
Comfort, my lord; and so Itake my leave.
And thus I seal my truth,and bid adieu.
Sweet Oxford, and myloving Montague,
And all at once, once morea happy farewell.
Farewell, sweet lords:let's meet at Coventry.
Here at the palace I willrest awhile.
Cousin of Exeter, whatthinks your lordship?
Methinks the power thatEdward hath in field
Should not be able toencounter mine.
The doubt is that he willseduce the rest.
That's not my fear; mymeed hath got me fame:
I have not stopp'd mineears to their demands,
Nor posted off their suitswith slow delays;
My pity hath been balm toheal their wounds,
My mildness hath allay'dtheir swelling griefs,
My mercy dried theirwater-flowing tears;
I have not been desirousof their wealth,
Nor much oppress'd themwith great subsidies.
Nor forward of revenge,though they much err'd:
Then why should they loveEdward more than me?
No, Exeter, these graceschallenge grace:
And when the lion fawnsupon the lamb,
The lamb will never ceaseto follow him.
Hark, hark, my lord! whatshouts are these?
Seize on the shame-facedHenry, bear him hence;
And once again proclaim usKing of England.
You are the fount thatmakes small brooks to flow:
Now stops thy spring; mysea shall suck them dry,
And swell so much thehigher by their ebb.
Hence with him to theTower; let him not speak.
And, lords, towardsCoventry bend we our course
Where peremptory Warwicknow remains:
The sun shines hot; and,if we use delay,
Cold biting winter marsour hoped-for hay.
(drums and trumpets)
Where is the post thatcame from valiant Oxford?
How far hence is thy lord,mine honest fellow?
By this at Dunsmore,marching hitherward.
Where is the post thatcame from Montague?
How far off is our brotherMontague?
By this at Daintry, with apuissant troop.
And, by thy guess, hownigh is Clarence now?
At Southam I did leave himwith his forces,
And do expect him heresome two hours hence.
Then Clarence is at hand,I hear his drum.
It is not his, my lord;here Southam lies:
The drum your honour hearsmarcheth from Warwick.
Who should that be? belike,unlook'd-for friends.
They are at hand, and youshall quickly know.
O unbid spite! is sportfulEdward come?
Where slept our scouts, orhow are they seduced,
That we could hear no newsof his repair?
Now, Warwick, wilt thouope the city gates,
Speak gentle words andhumbly bend thy knee,
Call Edward king and athis hands beg mercy?
And he shall pardon theethese outrages.
Nay, rather, wilt thoudraw thy forces hence,
Confess who set thee upand pluck'd thee down,
Call Warwick patron and bepenitent?
And thou shalt stillremain the Duke of York.
I thought, at least, hewould have said the king;
Or did he make the jestagainst his will?
Is not a dukedom, sir, agoodly gift?
Ay, by my faith, for apoor earl to give:
I'll do thee service forso good a gift.
'Twas I that gave thekingdom to thy brother.
Why then 'tis mine, if butby Warwick's gift.
Thou art no Atlas for sogreat a weight:
And weakling, Warwicktakes his gift again;
And Henry is my king,Warwick his subject.
But Warwick's king isEdward's prisoner:
And, gallant Warwick, dobut answer this:
What is the body when thehead is off?
Alas, that Warwick had nomore forecast,
But, whiles he thought tosteal the single ten,
The king was slilyfinger'd from the deck!
You left King Henry at theBishop's palace,
And, ten to one, you'llmeet him in the Tower.
'Tis even so; yet you areWarwick still.
Come, Warwick, take the time;kneel down, kneel down:
Nay, when? strike now, orelse the iron cools.
I had rather chop thishand off at a blow,
And with the other flingit at thy face,
Than bear so low a sail,to strike to thee.
Sail how thou canst, havewind and tide thy friend,
This hand, fast woundabout thy coal-black hair
Shall, whiles thy head iswarm and new cut off,
Write in the dust thissentence with thy blood,
'Wind-changing Warwick nowcan change no more.'
O cheerful colours! seewhere Oxford comes!
Oxford, Oxford, forLancaster!
The gates are open, let usenter too.
So other foes may set uponour backs.
Stand we in good array;for they no doubt
Will issue out again andbid us battle:
If not, the city being butof small defence,
We'll quickly rouse thetraitors in the same.
O, welcome, Oxford! for wewant thy help.
Montague, Montague, forLancaster!
Thou and thy brother bothshall buy this treason
Even with the dearestblood your bodies bear.
The harder match'd, thegreater victory:
My mind presageth happygain and conquest.
Somerset, Somerset, forLancaster!
Two of thy name, bothDukes of Somerset,
Have sold their lives untothe house of York;
And thou shalt be thethird if this sword hold.
And lo, where George ofClarence sweeps along,
Of force enough to bid hisbrother battle;
With whom an upright zealto right prevails
More than the nature of abrother's love!
Clarence. Clarence forLancaster.
et tu Brute. Wilt thou stabCaesar to?
A parley sent to George ofClarence.
(horn sounds)
Come, Clarence, come; thouwilt, if Warwick call.
Father of Warwick, knowyou what this means?
Look here, I throw myinfamy at thee
I will not ruinate myfather's house,
Who gave his blood to linethe stones together,
And set up Lancaster. Why,trow'st thou, Warwick,
That Clarence is so harsh,so blunt, unnatural,
To bend the fatalinstruments of war
Against his brother andhis lawful king?
Perhaps thou wilt objectmy holy oath:
To keep that oath weremore impiety
Than Jephthah's, when hesacrificed his daughter.
I am so sorry for mytrespass made
That, to deserve well atmy brother's hands,
I here proclaim myself thymortal foe,
With resolution,wheresoe'er I meet thee--
As I will meet thee, ifthou stir abroad--
To plague thee for thyfoul misleading me.
And so, proud-heartedWarwick, I defy thee,
And to my brother turn myblushing cheeks.
Pardon me, Edward, I willmake amends:
And, Richard, do not frownupon my faults,
For I will henceforth beno more unconstant.
Now welcome more, and tentimes more beloved,
Than if thou never hadstdeserved our hate.
Welcome, good Clarence;this is brotherlike.
O passing traitor,perjured and unjust!
What, Warwick, wilt thouleave the town and fight?
Or shall we beat thestones about thine ears?
Alas, I am not coop'd herefor defence!
I will away towards Barnetpresently,
And bid thee battle,Edward, if thou darest.
Yes, Warwick, Edwarddares, and leads the way.
Lords, to the field; SaintGeorge and victory!
(drums horns)
So, lie thou there: diethou, and die our fear;
For Warwick was a bug thatfear'd us all.
Now, Montague, sit fast; Iseek for thee,
That Warwick's bones maykeep thine company.
Ah, who is nigh? come tome, friend or foe,
And tell me who is victor,York or Warwick?
Why ask I that? my mangledbody shows,
My blood, my want of strength,my sick heart shows.
That I must yield my bodyto the earth
And, by my fall, theconquest to my foe.
Thus yields the cedar tothe axe's edge,
Whose arms gave shelter tothe princely eagle,
Under whose shade theramping lion slept,
Whose top-branch overpeer'dJove's spreading tree
And kept low shrubs fromwinter's powerful wind.
These eyes, that now are dimm'dwith death's black veil,
Have been as piercing asthe mid-day sun,
To search the secrettreasons of the world:
The wrinkles in my brows,now filled with blood,
Were liken'd oft to kinglysepulchres;
For who lived king, but Icould dig his grave?
And who durst smile whenWarwick bent his brow?
Lo, now my glory smear'din dust and blood!
My parks, my walks, mymanors that I had.
Even now forsake me, andof all my lands
Is nothing left me but mybody's length.
Why, what is pomp, rule,reign, but earth and dust?
And, live we how we can,yet die we must.
Ah, Warwick, Warwick! wertthou as we are.
We might recover all ourloss again;
The queen from France hathbrought a puissant power:
Even now we heard the news:ah, could'st thou fly!
Why, then I would not fly.Ah, Montague,
If thou be there, sweetbrother, take my hand.
And with thy lips keep inmy soul awhile!
Thou lovest me not; for,brother, if thou didst,
Thy tears would wash thiscold congealed blood
That glues my lips andwill not let me speak.
Come quickly, Montague, orI am dead.
Ah, Warwick! Montague hathbreathed his last;
And to the latest gaspcried out for Warwick,
And said 'Commend me to myvaliant brother.'
And more he would havesaid, and more he spoke,
Which sounded like acanon in a vault,
That might not bedistinguished; but at last
I well might hear,delivered with a groan,
'O, farewell, Warwick!'
Sweet rest his soul! Fly,lords, and save yourselves;
For Warwick bids you allfarewell to meet in heaven.
Away, away, to meet thequeen's great power!
(horns and cheers)
Thus far our fortune keepsan upward course,
And we are graced withwreaths of victory.
But, in the midst of thisbright-shining day,
I spy a black, suspicious,threatening cloud,
That will encounter withour glorious sun,
Ere he attain his easefulwestern bed:
I mean, my lords, thosepowers that the queen
Hath raised in Gallia havearrived our coast
And, as we hear, march onto fight with us.
A little gale will soondisperse that cloud
And blow it to the sourcefrom whence it came:
Thy very beams will drythose vapours up,
For every cloud engendersnot a storm.
The queen is valued thirtythousand strong,
And Somerset, with Oxfordfled to her:
If she have time tobreathe be well assured
Her faction will be fullas strong as ours.
We are advertised by ourloving friends
That they do hold theircourse toward Tewksbury:
We, having now the best atBarnet field,
Will thither straight, forwillingness rids way;
And, as we march, ourstrength will be augmented
In every county as we goalong.
Strike up the drum; cry'Courage!' and away.
(drums sounds) Courage!
Great lords, wise men ne'ersit and wail their loss,
But cheerly seek how toredress their harms.
What though the mast benow blown overboard,
The cable broke, theholding-anchor lost,
And half our sailorsswallow'd in the flood?
Yet lives our pilot still.Is't meet that he
Should leave the helm andlike a fearful lad
With tearful eyes addwater to the sea
And give more strength tothat which hath too much,
Whiles, in his moan, theship splits on the rocks,
Which industry and couragemight have saved?
Ah, what a shame! ah, whata fault were this!
Say Warwick was ouranchor; what of that?
And Montague our topmost;what of him?
Our slaughter'd friends thetackles; what of these?
Why, is not Oxford hereanother anchor?
And Somerset anothergoodly mast?
The friends of France ourshrouds and tacklings?
And, though unskilful, whynot Ned and I
For once allow'd theskilful pilot's charge?
We will not from the helmto sit and weep,
But keep our course, thoughthe rough wind say no,
From shelves and rocks thatthreaten us with wreck.
As good to chide the wavesas speak them fair.
And what is Edward butruthless sea?
What Clarence but aquicksand of deceit?
And Richard but a raggedfatal rock?
All these the enemies toour poor bark.
Say you can swim; alas,'tis but a while!
Tread on the sand; why,there you quickly sink:
Bestride the rock; thetide will wash you off,
Or else you famish; that'sa threefold death.
This speak I, lords, tolet you understand,
If case some one of youwould fly from us,
That there's no hoped-formercy with the brothers
More than with ruthlesswaves, with sands and rocks.
Why, courage then! whatcannot be avoided
'Twere childish weaknessto lament or fear.
Methinks a woman of thisvaliant spirit
Should, if a coward heardher speak these words,
Infuse his breast withmagnanimity
And make him, naked, foila man at arms.
I speak not this asdoubting any here
For did I but suspect afearful man
He should have leave to goaway betimes,
Lest in our need he mightinfect another
And make him of likespirit to himself.
If any such be here--asGod forbid!--
Let him depart before weneed his help.
Women and children of sohigh a courage,
And warriors faint! why,'twere perpetual shame.
O brave young prince! thyfamous grandfather
Doth live again in thee:long mayst thou live
To bear his image andrenew his glories!
And he that will not fightfor such a hope.
Go home to bed, and likethe owl by day,
If he arise, be mock'd andwonder'd at.
Thanks, gentle Somerset;sweet Oxford, thanks.
And take his thanks thatyet hath nothing else.
Prepare you, lords, forEdward is at hand.
Ready to fight; thereforebe resolute.
I thought no less: it ishis policy
To haste thus fast, tofind us unprovided.
But he's deceived; we arein readiness.
(crowd) Ay!
This cheers my heart, tosee your forwardness.
Here pitch our battle;hence we will not budge.
(trumpet, battle cries)
(Edward yells fromoutside the walls)
Brave followers, yonderstands the thorny wood,
Which, by the heavens'assistance and your strength,
Must by the roots be hewnup yet ere night.
I need not add more fuelto your fire,
For well I wot ye blaze toburn them out
Give signal to the fight,and to it, lords!
Lords, knights, andgentlemen, what I should say
My tears gainsay; forevery word I speak,
Ye see, I drink the waterof my eye.
Therefore, no more but this:Henry, your sovereign,
Is prisoner to the foe;his state usurp'd,
His realm a slaughter-house,his subjects slain,
His statutes cancell'd andhis treasure spent;
And yonder stands the wolfthat makes this spoil.
You fight in justice lords:then, in God's name, lords,
Be valiant and give signalto the fight.
Now here a period oftumultuous broils.
Away with Oxford to HamesCastle straight:
For Somerset, off with hisguilty head.
Go, bear them hence; Iwill not hear them speak.
For my part, I'll nottrouble thee with words.
Nor I, but stoop withpatience to my fortune.
So part we sadly in thistroublous world,
To meet with joy in sweetJerusalem.
Is proclamation made, thatwho finds Edward
Shall have a high reward,and he his life?
It is: and lo, whereyouthful Edward comes!
Bring forth the gallant,let us hear him speak.
What! can so young a thornbegin to prick?
Edward, what satisfactioncanst thou make
For bearing arms, forstirring up my subjects,
And all the trouble thouhast turn'd me to?
Speak like a subject,proud ambitious York!
Suppose that I am now myfather's mouth;
Resign thy chair, andwhere I stand kneel thou,
Whilst I propose theselfsame words to thee,
Which traitor, thouwouldst have me answer to.
Ah, that thy father hadbeen so resolved!
That you might still haveworn the petticoat,
And ne'er have stol'n thebreech from Lancaster.
Let AEsop fable in awinter's night;
His currish riddles sortnot with this place.
By heaven, brat, I'llplague ye for that word.
Ay, thou wast born to be aplague to men.
For God's sake, take awaythis captive scold.
Nay, take away thisscolding crookback rather.
Peace, wilful boy, or Iwill charm your tongue.
Untutor'd lad, thou arttoo malapert.
I know my duty; you areall undutiful:
Lascivious Edward, andthou perjured George,
And thou mis-shapen Dick,I tell ye all
I am your better, traitorsas ye are:
And thou usurp'st myfather's right and mine.
Take that, thou likenessof this railer here.
Sprawl'st thou? take that,to end thy agony.
And there's for twittingme with perjury.
O, kill me too!
Marry, and shall.
Hold, Richard, hold; forwe have done too much.
Why should she live, tofill the world with words?
What, doth she swoon? usemeans for her recovery.
Clarence, excuse me to theking my brother;
I'll hence to London on aserious matter:
Ere ye come there, be sureto hear some news.
What? what?
The Tower, the Tower. I'll rootthem out.
O Ned, sweet Ned! speak tothy mother, boy!
Canst thou not speak? Otraitors! murderers!
They that stabb'd Caesarshed no blood at all,
Did not offend, nor werenot worthy blame,
If this foul deed were byto equal it:
He was a man; this, inrespect, a child:
And men ne'er spend theirfury on a child.
What's worse than murderer,that I may name it?
No, no, my heart willburst, and if I speak:
And I will speak, that somy heart may burst.
Butchers and villains!bloody cannibals!
How sweet a plant have youuntimely cropp'd!
You have no children,butchers! if you had,
The thought of them wouldhave stirr'd up remorse:
But if you ever chance tohave a child,
Look in his youth to havehim so cut off
As, deathmen, you have ridthis sweet young prince!
Away with her; go, bearher hence perforce.
Nay, never bear me hence,dispatch me here,
Here sheathe thy sword,I'll pardon thee my death:
What, wilt thou not? then,Clarence, do it thou.
By heaven, I will not dothee so much ease.
Good Clarence, do; sweetClarence, do thou do it.
Didst thou not hear meswear I would not do it?
Ay, but thou usest toforswear thyself:
'Twas sin before, but now'tis charity.
What, wilt thou not? Where isthat devil's butcher? Richard.
Hard-favour'd Richard?Where art thou?
Thou art not here: murderis thy alms-deed;
Petitioners for blood thoune'er put'st back.
Away, I say; I charge ye,bear her hence.
So come to you and yours,as to this Prince!
Where's Richard gone?
To London, all in post;and, as I guess,
To make a bloody supper inthe Tower.
He's sudden, if a thingcomes in his head.
Now march we hence:discharge the common sort
With pay and thanks, andlet's away to London
To see our gentle queenhow well she fares:
By this, I hope, she hatha son for me.
Good day, my lord. What,at your book so hard?
Ay, my good lord:--mylord, I should say rather;
'Tis sin to flatter;'good' was little better:
'Good Gloucester' and'good devil' were alike,
And both preposterous;therefore, not 'good lord.'
Sirrah, leave us toourselves: we must confer.
So flies the recklessshepherd from the wolf;
So first the harmless sheepdoth yield his fleece
And next his throat unto thebutcher's knife.
What scene of death hathRoscius now to act?
Suspicion always hauntsthe guilty mind;
The thief doth fear eachbush an officer.
The bird that hath beenlimed in a bush,
With trembling wingsmisdoubteth every bush;
And I, the hapless male toone sweet bird,
Have now the fatal objectin my eye
Where my poor young waslimed, was caught and kill'd.
Why, what a peevish foolwas that of Crete,
That taught his son theoffice of a fowl!
An yet, for all his wings,the fool was drown'd.
I, Daedalus; my poor boy,Icarus;
Thy father, Minos, thatdenied our course;
The sun that sear'd thewings of my sweet boy
Thy brother Edward, andthyself the sea
Whose envious gulf didswallow up his life.
Ah, kill me with thyweapon, not with words!
My breast can better brookthy dagger's point
Than can my ears thattragic history.
But wherefore dost thoucome? is't for my life?
Think'st thou I am anexecutioner?
A persecutor, I am sure,thou art:
If murdering innocents beexecuting,
Why, then thou art anexecutioner.
Thy son I kill'd for hispresumption.
Hadst thou been kill'd whenfirst thou didst presume,
Thou hadst not lived tokill a son of mine.
And thus I prophesy, thatmany a thousand,
Which now mistrust noparcel of my fear,
And many an old man's sighand many a widow's,
And many an orphan'swater-standing eye--
Men for their sons, wivesfor their husbands,
And orphans for theirparents timeless death--
Shall rue the hour thatever thou wast born.
The owl shriek'd at thybirth,--an evil sign;
The night-crow cried,aboding luckless time;
Dogs howl'd, and hideoustempest shook down trees;
The raven rook'd her onthe chimney's top,
And chattering pies indismal discords sung.
Thy mother felt more thana mother's pain,
And, yet brought forthless than a mother's hope,
To wit, an indigested anddeformed lump,
Not like the fruit of sucha goodly tree.
Teeth hadst thou in thyhead when thou wast born,
To signify thou camest tobite the world:
And, if the rest be truewhich I have heard,
Thou camest--
I'll hear no more: die,prophet in thy speech:
For this amongst the rest,was I ordain'd.
Ay, and for much moreslaughter after this.
God forgive my sins, andpardon thee!
What, will the aspiringblood of Lancaster
Sink in the ground? I thoughtit would have mounted.
See how my sword weeps forthe poor king's death!
O, may such purple tearsbe alway shed
From those that wish thedownfall of our house!
If any spark of life beyet remaining,
Down, down to hell; andsay I sent thee thither:
I, that have neither pity,love, nor fear.
Indeed, 'tis true thatHenry told me of;
For I have often heard mymother say
I came into the world withmy legs forward:
Had I not reason, thinkye, to make haste,
And seek their ruin thatusurp'd our right?
The midwife wonder'd andthe women cried
'O, Jesus bless us, he isborn with teeth!'
And so I was; whichplainly signified
That I should snarl andbite and play the dog.
Then, since the heavenshave shaped my body so,
Let hell make crook'd mymind to answer it.
I have no brother, I amlike no brother;
And this word 'love,' whichgraybeards call divine,
Be resident in men likeone another
And not in me: I am myselfalone.
Clarence, beware; thoukeep'st me from the light:
But I will sort a pitchyday for thee;
For I will buz abroad suchprophecies
That Edward shall befearful of his life,
And then, to purge hisfear, I'll be thy death.
King Henry and the princehis son are gone:
Clarence, thy turn isnext, and then the rest,
Counting myself but badtill I be best.
I'll throw thy body inanother room
And triumph, Henry, in thyday of doom.
( drums horns)
(trumpets)
(group) Long live Edward theFourth!
Once more we sit inEngland's royal throne,
Re-purchased with theblood of enemies.
What valiant foemen, liketo autumn's corn,
Have we mow'd down, intops of all their pride!
Three Dukes of Somerset,threefold renown'd
For hardy and undoubtedchampions;
Two Cliffords, as thefather and the son,
With them, the two bravebears, Warwick and Montague,
That in their chainsfetter'd the kingly lion
And made the foresttremble when they roar'd.
Thus have we sweptsuspicion from our seat
And made our footstool ofsecurity.
Come hither, Bess, and letme kiss my boy.
Young Ned, for thee, thineuncles and myself
Have in our armours watch'dthe winter's night,
Went all afoot in summer'sscalding heat,
That thou mightst repossessthe crown in peace;
And of our labours thoushalt reap the gain.
Clarence and Gloucester,love my lovely queen;
And kiss your princelynephew, brothers both.
The duty that I owe untoyour majesty
I seal upon the lips ofthis sweet babe.
Thanks, noble Clarence;worthy brother, thanks.
And, that I love the treefrom whence thou sprang'st,
Witness the loving kiss Igive the fruit.
To say the truth soJudas kissed his master
And cried 'all hail!' whenas he meant all harm.
Now am I seated as my souldelights,
Having my country's peaceand brothers' loves.
What will your grace havedone with Margaret?
Reignier, her father, tothe king of France
Hath pawn'd the Sicils andJerusalem,
And hither have they sentit for her ransom.
Away with her, and wafther hence to France.
And now what rests butthat we spend the time
With stately triumphs,mirthful comic shows,
Such as befits thepleasure of the court?
Sound drums and trumpets!farewell sour annoy!
For here, I hope, beginsour lasting joy.
(drums)